MTH225-Fall2023/course-docs/standards-mth225-f23.md, before:

# Standards for Student Work in MTH 225

**This document contains all the details for what constitutes "successful" work on each type of assignment in the course**. Use this document to check your work for correctness before submitting it. 

## Course Prep 

Course Prep assignments are graded on the basis of **completeness and good-faith effort**. *Correctness is not taken into account for the grade*; but a good-faith effort to *try* to be correct must be evident. Your work on Class Prep is marked either *Complete* or *Incomplete* using the following criteria: 

|    Mark    |                                                                   Criteria                                                                    |
| :--------: | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  **Success**  | Every item on the form that is not marked "Optional" has a complete and good-faith response; and the form is submitted prior to the time of grading. |
| **Incomplete** |   **Either** there is a question whose response is left blank (and is not marked "Optional"), **or** the form is submitted late.                                                                                                                                          |

Notes on Class Prep: 

- **Correct answers are not required on Class Prep, only a complete good faith effort to answer all the required items**. In fact, one of the reasons we do Class Prep is to surface any misconceptions or errors in thinking that you might be having at the beginning of a new topic, so we can work on those in class. So feel free to make as many honest mistakes as you want. 
- **Omission of an item not marked "Optional" from the responses results in an Incomplete**. This applies even if the omission was accidental, so be sure to double-check your responses to look for items unintentionally left blank. 
- **Items that have a response consisting only of "I don't know", "I don't understand", etc. will be treated as blank responses.** That is, such responses will result in an *Incomplete* on the assignment. You do not have to be correct in your responses, but you must *try* to be correct and respond to the assignment items with your best understanding, even if you have questions. If that is the case, there will be a separate item on the Class Prep for your questions.


## Application/Analysis 

Application/Analyis work is graded on the basis of **completeness and overall correctness**. You are expected to submit good-faith attempts at complete solutions for each item on the assignment, and your work must overall demonstrate substantive (though possibly still-growing) skill with the material. Your work on Application/Analysis sets is marked *Success*, *Retry*, or *Incomplete*: 

|    Mark    |                                                                                   Criteria                                                                                    |
| :--------: | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  **Success**   | All parts of the assignment have a good-faith effort at a complete and correct response, and the work is mostly correct with no more than a few errors (and no major errors). |
|   **Retry**    |  All parts of the assignment have a good-faith effort at a complete and correct response, but either there are numerous minor errors to correct or at least one major error.  |
| **Incomplete** | At least one part of the assignment has no work for it; or there is work but it is not a serious attempt at a correct response; or there are major errors throughout the work; or the work is not legible. |

Work that is marked *Retry* will get feedback on the issues that are present, and then the work can be revised once. Work that is marked *Incomplete* may be revised once but feedback on the work will be minimal, and it requires a token to revise. 

## Standards for Skill Quizzes

Each Learning Target has its own set of **Success Criteria** that will appear on Skill Quizzes. Your work on a Skill Quiz will be marked *Success* if the work meets the success criteria. Otherwise it will be marked *Retry* and you'll receive feedback on your work. Skills appear on multiple quizzes, so you have multiple chances to Succeed on each.

## Standards for AEPs 

AEPs are the most complex and involved assignments you will have in MTH 225. They involve writing and communication in addition to mathematical and computer work. Like Application/Analysis, AEPs are marked *Success*, *Retry*, or *Incomplete* but the criteria are different: 

|      Mark      | Criteria                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| :------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
|  **Success**   | The work on the problem is complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented.                                                                                                                                    |
|   **Retry**    | The work on the problem shows a good-faith effort to be complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented, but there is at least one significant issue that shows a lack of full understanding of the concepts and needs revision. |
| **Incomplete** | The work on the problem is not a good-faith effort at being complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented. (See below for details) |

Please note: **Getting a right answer is not the object of an AEP**. Some problems on AEPs may not even have a single right answer, but instead ask you to model some situation where you have to make choices or assumptions and then follow through and explain yourself. So: 

>[!IMPORTANT]
>The main criteria for AEPs is the quality of your solution and the degree to which you explain yourself clearly.


The four attributes of a successful AEP are *Ccmpleteness*, *correctness*, *clear communication*, and *professional presentation*: 

- **Completeness** means that all required parts of the solution are fully present and explained, with no major gaps left for the reader to fill in. A complete solution is self-contained: **A reader who has the math background of a student in the course should be able to follow the solution completely from start to finish without doing any extra work.** When writing up an AEP, ask yourself if this is the case; imagine yourself in the position of someone reading your work for the first time. If you can't honestly say that the average MTH 225 could follow the solution from beginning to end and agree with your conclusions without doing any additional work on the side, then your writeup needs further editing. (And it will probably be marked *Revise* if submitted.)

- **Correctness** means the work is free from major errors. There are four main kinds of major errors that can affect correctness: 

1. *Computational error*. This is when you simply make a mistake in computing something, like adding $5+3$ and getting $9$. 
2. *Logical error*. This is when you draw incorrect conclusions from data. For example, if you are told that the statement "All math professors are over 40 years old" is false but conclude that *no* math professors are over 40, that's a logical error. (You can only conclude that *there exists* a math professor who isn't over 40.)
3. *Factual error*. This results from misstating definitions, theorems, steps of an algorithm, or parameters in a problem statement. For example, if you are using the Binomial Coefficient and get the formula wrong, that's a significant factual error (even if you use the wrong formula correctly). Or, if a problem states that there are 100 objects that need to be sorted but you mis-copy and sort 10 objects instead, that's a factual error. 
4. *Semantic error*. This happens when you make a statement that is grammatically correct, but the statement itself has no meaning. The statement "[Colorless green ideas sleep furiously](https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously)"[^1] is an example. So is the statement "The function of the graph is 2." (What does this statement even mean?) Semantic errors often happen when applying a concept to the wrong kind of object (like using the word "function" to describe a graph; there is no such thing as "the function of a graph"). 

- **Clear communication** means presenting the flow of your ideas in a way that makes it easy to understand. Clearly communicated mathematical solutions are typically neither 100% English and 0% math notation, nor 0% English and 100% math notation, but rather a blend of both English and math that maximizes the clarity of what you are trying to say. **A solution that is nothing but mathematical computation or computer code with little to no English explanation is generally not clear.** So is a solution that has *no* math or code in it. When English is used, the language is simple (not riddled with jargon), to the point, and free of grammatical and spelling errors; when math is used, it is well organized with no notational errors and with a coherent flow. Remember your audience -- classmates in MTH 225 who have the same math background as you but no familiarity with your problem. Would that person find your writing clear? 

- **Professional presentation** means your work looks good. One special case of this is that **work on AEPs must be typed up on a computer, not handwritten**. Handwritten work will be marked *Incomplete* without further comment. Most AEPs will be done in Jupyter notebooks, which we will learn about in class. Even when done in electronic format, the work must be neat and  well-organized --- something you would be comfortable including in a portfolio of your work to a potential employer. 

[^1]: https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously

### Things that result in *Incomplete* on AEPs 

Finally, please note that **when you submit work on an AEP, you're expected to give a good-faith effort at a complete and correct solution.** If there are issues, you can always revise and resubmit. But **a submission will be marked *Incomplete* and returned to you without further comment if any of the following are found:**

- Significant portions of the solution that are not submitted, or which are not good-faith efforts at a correct or complete solution. This includes partial work with questions about how to get started or how to finish; please do not submit these, but rather come to drop-in hours with questions. 
- Pervasive errors in communication, including incorrect English usage;
- Handwritten work; 
- Work that is poorly formatted or confusingly organized; or
- In computer code, if any of the code throws a syntax error when evaluated. (You're expected to debug syntax errors prior to submission; just run the code and squash any bugs you find.)

The list above is not all-inclusive. But, before turning in work, use it as a checklist --- if your work has any of those attributes, don't turn it in yet!

Commit message:

Finish first drafts of Standards document

MTH225-Fall2023/course-docs/standards-mth225-f23.md, after:

# Standards for Student Work in MTH 225

**This document contains all the details for what constitutes "successful" work on each type of assignment in the course**. Use this document to check your work for correctness before submitting it. 

## Course Prep 

Course Prep assignments are graded on the basis of **completeness and good-faith effort**. *Correctness is not taken into account for the grade*; but a good-faith effort to *try* to be correct must be evident. Your work on Class Prep is marked either *Complete* or *Incomplete* using the following criteria: 

|    Mark    |                                                                   Criteria                                                                    |
| :--------: | :-------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  **Success**  | Every item on the form that is not marked "Optional" has a complete and good-faith response; and the form is submitted prior to the time of grading. |
| **Incomplete** |   **Either** there is a question whose response is left blank (and is not marked "Optional"), **or** the form is submitted late.                                                                                                                                          |

Notes on Class Prep: 

- **Correct answers are not required on Class Prep, only a complete good faith effort to answer all the required items**. In fact, one of the reasons we do Class Prep is to surface any misconceptions or errors in thinking that you might be having at the beginning of a new topic, so we can work on those in class. So feel free to make as many honest mistakes as you want. 
- **Omission of an item not marked "Optional" from the responses results in an Incomplete**. This applies even if the omission was accidental, so be sure to double-check your responses to look for items unintentionally left blank. 
- **Items that have a response consisting only of "I don't know", "I don't understand", etc. will be treated as blank responses.** That is, such responses will result in an *Incomplete* on the assignment. You do not have to be correct in your responses, but you must *try* to be correct and respond to the assignment items with your best understanding, even if you have questions. If that is the case, there will be a separate item on the Class Prep for your questions.


## Application/Analysis 

Application/Analyis work is graded on the basis of **completeness and overall correctness**. You are expected to submit good-faith attempts at complete solutions for each item on the assignment, and your work must overall demonstrate substantive (though possibly still-growing) skill with the material. Your work on Application/Analysis sets is marked *Success*, *Retry*, or *Incomplete*: 

|    Mark    |                                                                                   Criteria                                                                                    |
| :--------: | :---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------: |
|  **Success**   | All parts of the assignment have a good-faith effort at a complete and correct response, and the work is mostly correct with no more than a few errors (and no major errors). |
|   **Retry**    |  All parts of the assignment have a good-faith effort at a complete and correct response, but either there are numerous minor errors to correct or at least one major error.  |
| **Incomplete** | At least one part of the assignment has no work for it; or there is work but it is not a serious attempt at a correct response; or there are major errors throughout the work; or the work is not legible. |

Work that is marked *Retry* will get feedback on the issues that are present, and then the work can be revised once. Work that is marked *Incomplete* may be revised once but feedback on the work will be minimal, and it requires a token to revise. 

## Standards for Skill Quizzes

Each Learning Target has its own set of **Success Criteria** that will appear on Skill Quizzes. Your work on a Skill Quiz will be marked *Success* if the work meets the success criteria. Otherwise it will be marked *Retry* and you'll receive feedback on your work. Skills appear on multiple quizzes, so you have multiple chances to Succeed on each.

Success criteria for the Learning Targets will be accumulated in this document as we progress through the course. 

## Standards for AEPs 

AEPs are the most complex and involved assignments you will have in MTH 225. They involve writing and communication in addition to mathematical and computer work. Like Application/Analysis, AEPs are marked *Success*, *Retry*, or *Incomplete* but the criteria are different: 

|      Mark      | Criteria                                                                                                                                                                                                                             |
| :------------: | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
|  **Success**   | The work on the problem is complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented.                                                                                                                                    |
|   **Retry**    | The work on the problem shows a good-faith effort to be complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented, but there is at least one significant issue that shows a lack of full understanding of the concepts and needs revision. |
| **Incomplete** | The work on the problem is not a good-faith effort at being complete, correct, clearly communicated, and professionally presented. (See below for details) |

Please note: **Getting a right answer is not the object of an AEP**. Some problems on AEPs may not even have a single right answer, but instead ask you to model some situation where you have to make choices or assumptions and then follow through and explain yourself. So: 

>[!IMPORTANT]
>The main criteria for AEPs is the quality of your solution and the degree to which you explain yourself clearly.


The four attributes of a successful AEP are *Ccmpleteness*, *correctness*, *clear communication*, and *professional presentation*: 

- **Completeness** means that all required parts of the solution are fully present and explained, with no major gaps left for the reader to fill in. A complete solution is self-contained: **A reader who has the math background of a student in the course should be able to follow the solution completely from start to finish without doing any extra work.** When writing up an AEP, ask yourself if this is the case; imagine yourself in the position of someone reading your work for the first time. If you can't honestly say that the average MTH 225 could follow the solution from beginning to end and agree with your conclusions without doing any additional work on the side, then your writeup needs further editing. (And it will probably be marked *Revise* if submitted.)

- **Correctness** means the work is free from major errors. There are four main kinds of major errors that can affect correctness: 

1. *Computational error*. This is when you simply make a mistake in computing something, like adding $5+3$ and getting $9$. 
2. *Logical error*. This is when you draw incorrect conclusions from data. For example, if you are told that the statement "All math professors are over 40 years old" is false but conclude that *no* math professors are over 40, that's a logical error. (You can only conclude that *there exists* a math professor who isn't over 40.)
3. *Factual error*. This results from misstating definitions, theorems, steps of an algorithm, or parameters in a problem statement. For example, if you are using the Binomial Coefficient and get the formula wrong, that's a significant factual error (even if you use the wrong formula correctly). Or, if a problem states that there are 100 objects that need to be sorted but you mis-copy and sort 10 objects instead, that's a factual error. 
4. *Semantic error*. This happens when you make a statement that is grammatically correct, but the statement itself has no meaning. The statement "[Colorless green ideas sleep furiously](https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously)"[^1] is an example. So is the statement "The function of the graph is 2." (What does this statement even mean?) Semantic errors often happen when applying a concept to the wrong kind of object (like using the word "function" to describe a graph; there is no such thing as "the function of a graph"). 

- **Clear communication** means presenting the flow of your ideas in a way that makes it easy to understand. Clearly communicated mathematical solutions are typically neither 100% English and 0% math notation, nor 0% English and 100% math notation, but rather a blend of both English and math that maximizes the clarity of what you are trying to say. **A solution that is nothing but mathematical computation or computer code with little to no English explanation is generally not clear.** So is a solution that has *no* math or code in it. When English is used, the language is simple (not riddled with jargon), to the point, and free of grammatical and spelling errors; when math is used, it is well organized with no notational errors and with a coherent flow. Remember your audience -- classmates in MTH 225 who have the same math background as you but no familiarity with your problem. Would that person find your writing clear? 

- **Professional presentation** means your work looks good. One special case of this is that **work on AEPs must be typed up on a computer, not handwritten**. Handwritten work will be marked *Incomplete* without further comment. Most AEPs will be done in Jupyter notebooks, which we will learn about in class. Even when done in electronic format, the work must be neat and  well-organized --- something you would be comfortable including in a portfolio of your work to a potential employer. 

[^1]: https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously

### Things that result in *Incomplete* on AEPs 

Finally, please note that **when you submit work on an AEP, you're expected to give a good-faith effort at a complete and correct solution.** If there are issues, you can always revise and resubmit. But **a submission will be marked *Incomplete* and returned to you without further comment if any of the following are found:**

- Significant portions of the solution that are not submitted, or which are not good-faith efforts at a correct or complete solution. This includes partial work with questions about how to get started or how to finish; please do not submit these, but rather come to drop-in hours with questions. 
- Pervasive errors in communication, including incorrect English usage;
- Handwritten work; 
- Work that is poorly formatted or confusingly organized; or
- In computer code, if any of the code throws a syntax error when evaluated. (You're expected to debug syntax errors prior to submission; just run the code and squash any bugs you find.)

The list above is not all-inclusive. But, before turning in work, use it as a checklist --- if your work has any of those attributes, don't turn it in yet!
