# AEP 8: Proving binomial coefficient identities 

## Overview 

In this AEP, you'll apply the concept of mathematical induction to prove an identity about binomial coefficients. 

**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

-  **P.2**  **(Core)**: Given a statement to be proven by (weak) induction, I can state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the proof.

Remember, AEPs do not have fixed deadlines; simply work on this item until you are ready to submit it. But remember the **Two Items Per Week Rule.** 

## Technology Background

No tech background needed or used on this one. 

## AEP Description and Tasks 

### What this AEP is about

The binomial coefficient $\binom{n}{k}$ not only counts certain kinds of arrangements, it has interesting properties of its own. We've seen a few of these **binomial coefficient identities** already: 

* For all natural numbers $n$ and\binom{n}{k} = \binom{n}{k}$

### Setup (do this first)

The material for this AEP is found in [Section 2.3 of the Levin text](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_polyfit.html). Before beginning the tasks below, you'll need to read through that section and work through the examples. There are exercises at the end as well that can give you further practice and will make this AEP go faster for you. 




### Tasks for this AEP

1. Consider the sequence $1, 3, 7, 13, 21, \dots$. Is this sequence $\Delta^k$-constant for some value of $k$? (That term is the central focus of the reading. You did the reading, right?) If so, what's the value of $k$? Be sure to explain your reasoning. 
2. Repeat for the sequence $2, 11, 34, 77, 146, 247,\ldots$
3. Repeat for the sequence $4, 12, 36, 108, 324, \dots$
4. Use the techniques of Section 2.3 to find a polynomial closed formula for the sequence in the first problem. 
5. Repeat for the sequence in the second problem. 

There is a sixth and final task for this AEP, and you have a choice of programming and non-programming options. 

**Non-programming option:** Work all of Exercise 12, about pirates stacking cannonballs (!), from the Levin text section 2.3. 

**Programming option:**  Write a Python function `dk_constant` that determines whether a sequence, given as a Python list, is $\Delta^k$-constant for some natural number $k$. The function will take one input: A Python list that holds the first **six** terms of a sequence. (You can assume the terms of the sequence are natural numbers.) The function determines whether the sequence is $\Delta^k$-constant for some $k$ and then `print`s to the screen one of two kinds of output: 

- If the sequence is $\Delta^k$-constant, the function prints `This sequence is Delta-k constant` where `k` is the appropriate value. 
- If the sequence does not appear to be $\Delta^k$-constant, the function prints `This sequence is not Delta-k constant`. 

Here are some sample inputs and outputs: 

```python
>dk_constant([2,3,7,14,24,37])
'This sequence is Delta-2 constant'

>dk_constant([1,8,27,64,125,216])
'This sequence is Delta-3 constant'

>dk_constant([1,2,4,8,16,32])
'This sequence is not Delta-k constant'

>dk_constant([1,1,2,3,5,8])
'This sequence is not Delta-k constant'

>dk_constant([4,4,4,4,4,4])
'This sequence is Delta-0 constant'
```
**Note:** As mentioned above, for simplicity we are forcing the list being input to `dk_constant` to have length 6. You may assume that the user is smart enough to always enter in a list of length 6. This is long enough to determine $\Delta^k$-constancy for $k$ up to 4. Technically a sequence that is $\Delta^k$-constant for $k=7$ or higher would always be labeled as "not $\Delta^k$-constant" by this function. That's not exactly right but we'll go with it for now, again to keep things simple. **However, your function should detect $\Delta^k$-constancy for $k$ up to 4.** 


## Assignment Expectations and Grading Criteria 

AEPs are graded using the "EMRN" rubric found in the syllabus. Please note, it is the case with all AEP's that **your grade is primarily based on your explanations and writing, and only secondarily on the precision and correctness of your computations.** Correct computations with insufficient explanation will need to be revised and may receive an "N" grade. 

Also, **significant incompleteness will result in a grade of "N".** This includes the following: 

- **Giving answers with no explanations.** As mentioned above, you are being graded on explanations and writing, not so much on answers. Submissions that contain items where there is an answer with no explanation or insufficient explanation, will be graded "N" and returned without comment.
- Leaving items blank (even accidentally)
- Leaving large gaps in computations (skipping important steps) 
- Giving only partial attempts at tasks (for example, working down to a certain point in a solution and then stopping because you need help) 

A grade of "E" is given if all of the above expectations are met, and the work is of superior quality in terms of the clarity of explanations and work, appearance of the writeup, and precision of the mathematics. 

**For the programming option:** Your function will be tested against a file of test cases that I have prepared. If your code produces syntax errors when it's evaluated (i.e. when the function itself is entered into memory) then your entire submission will be graded "N" --- **you are responsible for making sure your code executes without syntax errors before submitting it.** If your code produces errors or incorrect results when inputs are given to it on less than 3/4 of the test cases, your submission will be graded "R". If the error/incorrect results happen on less than 25% but more than 0% of the test cases, your work will be graded "M" (if there are no serious issues elsewhere). 

## Submitting your work 

**AEP submissions must be typewritten and saved as either a PDF or MS Word file. No part of your submission may involve handwriting; work that is submitted that contains handwriting will be graded N and returned without feedback.** This includes electronic handwritten documents, for example using a stylus and a note-taking app. To type up your work, you can use MS Word or Google Docs (both of which have equation editors for mathematical notation) or any other computer-based math typesetting tool. Just make sure you save your work as a Word document or PDF (no `.odt`, `.rtf`, or other file extensions are allowed).

**If you are doing the programming option:** Submit your code in a Jupyter notebook using Colab as outlined in earlier AEPs and elsewhere: Put your code in a notebook and then share a link to the notebook with me --- do not "invite" me because the email will go into spam --- and make sure that the permissions are set to "Everyone with the link can edit". Then include the link in the writeup for the rest of your work. 

When you have your work typed up, double-check it for neatness, correctness, and clarity. Then, go to Blackboard, then **Assignments**, then **AEP**, then **AEP 7**. Clicking on the text "AEP 7" will take you to a place on Blackboard where you can upload your work. All grading and revisions of labs are done entirely on Blackboard. **Do not email your work to the professor** -- only Blackboard submissions are accepted.

## Getting Help

Please note that according to the syllabus, for AEP's **"no interactions at all with another person or with unauthorized sources on the internet is allowed."** Violations of this rule include *any* consultation with other students or former students, including Math Center tutors; using work from another student or former student; submitting the problem set to an online help site such as Chegg or Coursehero; or asking for help in an online forum. All such violations will be treated as academic dishonesty and will result in a grade of "N" and being banned from revising the work. 

You **may** ask me (Talbert) for help on this assignment in the form of **specific mathematical or technical questions**. If I cannot answer a question because it would give too much away, I'll tell you so. **However please note: I will not "look over your work" before you submit it to give you feedback on the overall submission**; the expectations are clearly laid out above, so just follow those directions and submit your best work, and you'll be allowed to revise it if needed. 
 
**You can ask technology related questions to anyone at any time**. For example if you need help with Desmos, or with figuring out how to type up your work, there are no restrictions on that. I recommend the `#tech` channel on Campuswire so that you'll reach a large audience. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTA4ODAzMjQxXX0=
-->