# AEP 3: The Euclidean Algorithm and Extended Euclidean Algorithm

## Overview 

In this AEP, you will explore a fundamental algorithm for working with integers, divisibility, and modular arithmetic that has a special place in computing applications --- the **Euclidean Algorithm** and its cousin the **Extended Euclidean Algorithm**. 

**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

  + **A.3**: I can compute `a % b` given integers `a` and `b` and perform arithmetic mod $n$.  

Remember, AEPs do not have fixed deadlines; simply work on this item until you are ready to submit it. But remember the **Two Items Per Week Rule.** 

## Technology Background

No special technology skills are needed for this AEP. 

## AEP Description and Tasks 

### What this AEP is about





Through our study of modular arithmetic, we've seen that division of integers is both useful in applications and yet tricky in terms of actual computation. For example, say we want to compute `189123 % 26`. We have to divide 189123 by 26 and keep the remainder. But how does a computer know how to do that? Even if we just grab a calculator and enter in $189123 \div 26$, and get 7273.96153846153846, how did the calculator do that? What computational routine is happening in the hardware or software of the machine to find this result? 

To answer that question, we have to step back in time. 

### Setup (do this first) 

The **Euclidean algorithm** is the process that does this. The Euclidean algorithm actually finds the **greatest common divisor** (or "GCD") of two integers --- that is, the largest integer that divides both of the integers we start with. For example, the greatest common divisor of 10 and 15 is 5; the GCD of 18 and 20 is 2; the GCD of 19 and 22 is 1. It's in the process of finding the GCD of two integers that 



### Tasks for this AEP



## Assignment Expectations and Grading Criteria 

AEPs are graded using the "EMRN" rubric found in the syllabus. **A grade of E or M requires all of the following to be met:**


- In task 3:
	- **All parts of task 3 must consist not only of correct, complete computations but also clear, correct English text that explains to the reader what is taking place.** Responses that are just raw calculations with no text will receive a "N" (Not Assessible) grade. Responses that have significant issues with the clarity or correctness of the explanatory text may receive a grade of R ("Needs Revision").
	- The computations in parts (a) and (b) are correct and the work is shown (in addition to the explanatory text).
	- The computation in part (c) is correct, and the numerical process involves at least 4-5 computations from the left and the same amount from the right. (For comparison, the first limit that is computed in Example 1.2.4(a) in the textbook, which is shown in Tables 1.2.5 and 1.2.6, uses eight computations each.)
- All work is shown, and all results are explained clearly. 

Please note, it is the case with all AEP's that **your grade is primarily based on your explanations and writing, and only secondarily on the precision and correctness of your computations.** Correct computations with insufficient explanation will need to be revised and may receive an "N" grade. 

A grade of "E" is given if all of the above expectations are met, and the work is of superior quality in terms of the clarity of explanations and work, appearance of the writeup, and precision of the mathematics. 


## Submitting your work 

**AEP submissions must be typewritten and saved as either a PDF or MS Word file. No part of your submission may involve handwriting; work that is submitted that contains handwriting will be graded N and returned without feedback.** This includes electronic handwritten docments, for example using a stylus and a note-taking app. To type up your work, you can use MS Word or Google Docs (both of which have equation editors for mathematical notation) or any other computer-based math typesetting tool. Just make sure you save your work as a Word document or PDF (no `.odt`, `.rtf`, or other file extensions are allowed).

When you have your work typed up, double-check it for neatness, correctness, and clarity. Then, go to Blackboard, then **Assignments**, then **AEP**, then **AEP ???**. Clicking on the text "AEP ???" will take you to a place on Blackboard where you can upload your work. All grading and revisions of labs are done entirely on Blackboard. **Do not email your work to the professor** -- only Blackboard submissions are accepted.

## Getting Help

Please note that according to the syllabus, for AEP's **"no interactions at all with another person or with unauthorized sources on the internet is allowed."** Violations of this rule include *any* consultation with other students or former students, including Math Center tutors; using work from another student or former student; submitting the problem set to an online help site such as Chegg or Coursehero; or asking for help in an online forum. All such violations will be treated as academic dishonesty and will result in a grade of "N" and being banned from revising the work. 

You **may** ask me (Talbert) for help on this assignment in the form of **specific mathematical or technical questions**. If I cannot answer a question because it would give too much away, I'll tell you so. **However please note: I will not "look over your work" before you submit it to give you feedback on the overall submission**; the expectations are clearly laid out above, so just follow those directions and submit your best work, and you'll be allowed to revise it if needed. 
 
**You can ask technology related questions to anyone at any time**. For example if you need help with Desmos, or with figuring out how to type up your work, there are no restrictions on that. I recommend the `#tech` channel on Campuswire so that you'll reach a large audience. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbODI1NzI1NDc0XX0=
-->