# AEP 1: Encrypting messages with binary 

## Overview 

In this AEP, you will learn about a way of **encrypting** a message --- encoding it so that only the sender and the intended recipient can read it --- that uses base 2 representations of integers and a special operation on binary integers known as **XOR**. 

**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

+ **A.1:** I can represent an integer in base 2, 8, 10, and 16.

Remember, AEPs do not have fixed deadlines; simply work on this item until you are ready to submit it. But remember the **Two Items Per Week Rule.** 

## Technology Background

Some of the tasks in this AEP can be done by programming in Python. If you opt to do the programming tasks, you'll need to have completed the **Python/Jupyter Crash Course** that was assigned during the first week of classes. If you do not opt to do those tasks, there's no special tech background needed. 

## AEP Description and Tasks 

### What this AEP is about

We keep secrets from each other all the time. Those secrets aren't necessarily incriminating or bad; for example, our credit card numbers, social security numbers, and browsing histories are all information that we'd rather not have leaked into the public eye. To keep that information secret in a digital form, we use **encryption**. Encryption refers to any process that transforms information into a format that is readable only to the owner of that information and the people or machines who the owner decides should see it. When encrypted information is sent, the recipient turns it back into a readable format by **decrypting** it. Both encryption and decryption use a **key**, which is a piece of information (a number, a code phrase, etc.) that, like a physical key, is used to lock and unlock the information being sent. 

This AEP is about a method of encryption and decryption that at one time was very common in the early days of digital communications, and which (unfortunately, as you'll see) is still used in some places today. It involves transforming human-readable messages into binary integers, then using a binary string as a key to encrypt it, via a special binary operation called **XOR**. In this AEP you'll learn how to encrypt and decrypt using this **XOR cipher**, and play the role of an adversary by breaking an intercepted message encrypted using the XOR cipher. 

### Setup (do this first) 

Here's a description of how the XOR cipher works. 

First, the cipher involves the **XOR** operation. This is an arithmetic operation (denoted `xor`) on single bits (0's and 1's) that works as follows:

- `0 xor 0 = 0`
- `1 xor 0 = 1`
- `0 xor 1 = 1`
- `1 xor 1 = 0`

So this is like regular binary addition except for the last line --- **we don't ever carry a 1**. Ordinary addition would say `1 + 1 = 10` but here, `1 xor 1` is just `0`. So *`xor`-ing two bits together always leads to just a single bit*. 

We can therefore `xor` *strings* of bits together, just by `xor`-ing the individual bits in corresponding positions. For example: 

- `10 xor 11 = 01` (`xor` the two bits in the left position and the two in the right position)
- `1011 xor 1111 = 0100` 
- `10110001 xor 01010101 = 11100100`

Now we can describe how the cipher works: 

1. Start with a message, in regular text, to send. This is called the **plaintext**. For this AEP, assume that messages only involve capital English letters --- no lower-case letters, punctuation marks, numbers or other symbols. 
2. Convert each letter in the message into its **ASCII decimal** format. ASCII is a standard means of encoding characters into integers. You can find tables of ASCII values on the web, [for example here](http://www.asciitable.com/); in Python, the function `ord` returns the ASCII value of a character. For example, `ord('B')` returns `66`. The letter `A` has an ASCII value of 65; `B` is 66; and so on through `Z` which is 90. (The Python function `chr` reverses this: `chr(66) = 'B'`.) 
3. Then convert each of those decimal integers into 8-bit binary. 
4. Now choose a random 8-bit binary integer $k$ to use as your key. Share this with the person or machine you want to receive your message. 
5. For each 8-bit binary string $b$ that represents a character in the message: Compute `b xor k`. This produces a new 8-bit binary string. Do this for each "letter" in the message. The result is the encrypted version of the message. Send it off to your recipient. 
6. When the recipient gets the message, they have the key you sent them (it's the same key as the one you used to encrypt). The recipient breaks the message into 8-bit chunks and for each chunk $c$, they compute `c xor k` where `k` is the key. 
7. This process produces the same string of 8-bit binary integers that you started with. Convert them back to decimal, then from ASCII back to letters, and now the recipient can read the message. 

**Example:** Alice is sending Bob the message `RUN` using this cipher. 

- Converting the plaintext to ASCII gives: `82 85 78`. 
- Converting those to binary gives: `01010010 01010101 01001110`. 
- Alice and Bob agree to use the 8-bit key `11000011`. Alice `xor`s the key with each of the strings above: 
	- `01010010 xor 11000011 = 10010001`
	- `01010101 xor 11000011 = 10010110`
	- `01001110 xor 11000011 = 10001101`
- Alice sends Bob the message: `10010001 10010110 10001101`. 
- Bob receives this and `xor`s the message with the key: 
	- `10010001 xor 11000011 = 01010010`
	- `10010110 xor 11000011 = 01010101`
	- `10001101 xor 11000011 = 01001110`
- This is the same string of binary that Alice had. Bob converts each 8-bit string to decimal -- `82 85 78` -- and then back into letters using an ASCII table or function, to get `RUN`. 

Note, some implementations of this cipher include an extra step: Before sending the encrypted message, convert the 8-bit strings in the ciphertext to ASCII and send those. However this sometimes leads to characters that can't be visualized. 
 
### Tasks for this AEP

1. Make up a short (8 characters or less) message in English and a key, and encrypt it using the XOR cipher. Show each step of your process. 
2. You've received the following message that was encrypted using the XOR cipher and a key of `10110111`: `11111011 11110110 11111100 11110010 11100101 11100100`. Decrypt the message. 
3. In the decryption step of the XOR cipher, Bob `xor`s the encrypted message with the same key as Alice, and the plaintext message magically appears. Explain why this decryption step will always work. That is: Explain why taking a plaintext message, `xor`-ing it with the key, then `xor`-ing *that* with the key will always return the original message. (Hint: What happens when you `xor` a bit string with itself?) 
4. For the fourth task, you have a choice of two options. 

**Option 1: For coders.** Write two Python functions: One called `xor_encrypt` that implements the XOR cipher encryption step, and another called `xor_decrypt` that implements the XOR cipher decryption step. The `xor_encrypt` function should take in two strings of characters as input: the first string is the message to encrypt, and the second string is the key (an 8-bit binary integer, formatted as a string); and it should produce the binary string produced by the XOR cipher, formatted also as a string. The `xor_decrypt` function 





## Assignment Expectations and Grading Criteria 

AEPs are graded using the "EMRN" rubric found in the syllabus. **A grade of E or M requires all of the following to be met:**


- In task 3:
	- **All parts of task 3 must consist not only of correct, complete computations but also clear, correct English text that explains to the reader what is taking place.** Responses that are just raw calculations with no text will receive a "N" (Not Assessible) grade. Responses that have significant issues with the clarity or correctness of the explanatory text may receive a grade of R ("Needs Revision").
	- The computations in parts (a) and (b) are correct and the work is shown (in addition to the explanatory text).
	- The computation in part (c) is correct, and the numerical process involves at least 4-5 computations from the left and the same amount from the right. (For comparison, the first limit that is computed in Example 1.2.4(a) in the textbook, which is shown in Tables 1.2.5 and 1.2.6, uses eight computations each.)
- All work is shown, and all results are explained clearly. 

Please note, it is the case with all AEP's that **your grade is primarily based on your explanations and writing, and only secondarily on the precision and correctness of your computations.** Correct computations with insufficient explanation will need to be revised and may receive an "N" grade. 

A grade of "E" is given if all of the above expectations are met, and the work is of superior quality in terms of the clarity of explanations and work, appearance of the writeup, and precision of the mathematics. 


## Submitting your work 

**AEP submissions must be typewritten and saved as either a PDF or MS Word file. No part of your submission may involve handwriting; work that is submitted that contains handwriting will be graded N and returned without feedback.** This includes electronic handwritten docments, for example using a stylus and a note-taking app. To type up your work, you can use MS Word or Google Docs (both of which have equation editors for mathematical notation) or any other computer-based math typesetting tool. Just make sure you save your work as a Word document or PDF (no `.odt`, `.rtf`, or other file extensions are allowed).

When you have your work typed up, double-check it for neatness, correctness, and clarity. Then, go to Blackboard, then **Assignments**, then **AEP**, then **AEP ???**. Clicking on the text "AEP ???" will take you to a place on Blackboard where you can upload your work. All grading and revisions of labs are done entirely on Blackboard. **Do not email your work to the professor** -- only Blackboard submissions are accepted.

## Getting Help

Please note that according to the syllabus, for AEP's **"no interactions at all with another person or with unauthorized sources on the internet is allowed."** Violations of this rule include *any* consultation with other students or former students, including Math Center tutors; using work from another student or former student; submitting the problem set to an online help site such as Chegg or Coursehero; or asking for help in an online forum. All such violations will be treated as academic dishonesty and will result in a grade of "N" and being banned from revising the work. 

You **may** ask me (Talbert) for help on this assignment in the form of **specific mathematical or technical questions**. If I cannot answer a question because it would give too much away, I'll tell you so. **However please note: I will not "look over your work" before you submit it to give you feedback on the overall submission**; the expectations are clearly laid out above, so just follow those directions and submit your best work, and you'll be allowed to revise it if needed. 
 
**You can ask technology related questions to anyone at any time**. For example if you need help with Desmos, or with figuring out how to type up your work, there are no restrictions on that. I recommend the `#tech` channel on Campuswire so that you'll reach a large audience. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE4NzA2ODYyNl19
-->