# AEP 4: Working with sets in Python

## Overview 

In this AEP, you will write Python functions that will compute the union, intersection, and symmetric difference of two sets. 

**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

+ SF.2: I can perform operations on sets (intersection, union, complement, Cartesian product) and determine the cardinality of a set.

Remember, AEPs do not have fixed deadlines; simply work on this item until you are ready to submit it. But remember the **Two Items Per Week Rule.** 

## Technology Background

This is a programming-focused AEP, so you will need all the skills you learned in the Python/Jupyter crash course. 

## AEP Description and Tasks 

### What this AEP is about


Sets are not naturally-occurring data structures in Python, and so we need to have a means of representing them if we are to work with them. The most natural way to represent a set is as a list of elements. For example the mathematical set $\{1,2,3,4\}$ might be represented in Python as the list `[1,2,3,4]`. However, there are two major differences between mathematical sets and Python lists: 

1. *Python lists can have duplicate elements, while mathematical sets can't.* For example the list `[10, 10, 20]` is a valid Python list, but $\{10, 10, 20\}$ is not a valid set. Or put differently, $\{10,10,20\}$ and $\{10, 20\}$ are the same set, but `[10,10,20]` and `[10,20]` are not the same list in Python.
2. *Python lists are ordered, while mathematical sets aren't*. For example, the two lists `[3,4,5]` and `[4,3,5]` are considered different, but the two sets $\{3,4,5\}$ and $\{4,3,5\}$ are equal. 

It is possible to invoke some additional Python structure to treat lists like sets, using the command `set`. By running a list through this function, the list is changed into a different data type (namely type `set`) that can then be manipulated like a set. You can read about this [here](https://realpython.com/python-sets/); but in this AEP, you're going to write some code that will let us manipulate lists like sets, without changing lists to the `set` data type. 



### Setup (do this first) 

Before doing the tasks below, you'll need to review what you learned in the Python/Jupyter crash course, especially about lists. You can go back into CodeAcademy and review the lessons; or there are millions of websites and videos that also review the basics of Python lists. 

### Tasks for this AEP

1. Go to https://www.random.org/integers/ and generate two random 5-digit integers. Then use the Euclidean algorithm to find their GCD. Show all your work and clearly indicate the GCD. (Be sure to check your work using a computational tool!) 
2. Let's suppose you were using the Diffie-Hellman algorithm to find a secret key. You would need to pick a large prime number $p$ and then find a random integer $g$ so that $\gcd(g,p-1) = 1$. The pair $(g,p)$ would be made public. Go through the following process to generate a public key: 

    (a) Choose a prime number $p$ that is at least 10 digits long. You can just look one of these up and use it, but explain how you got your prime number. 

    (b) Choose a random integer $g$ and use the Euclidean Algorithm to prove that your choice has no common factors with $p-1$ other than 1. Show your work on the Euclidean Algorithm computation. 

3. An interesting and highly useful feature of GCD's is that the GCD of two integers can always be expressed as combination of the two integers themselves.  In general, if $\gcd(a,b) = n$, then there are integers $x$ and $y$ such that $ax + by = n$. For example, $\gcd(20,32) = 4$ and notice that $4 = 20(-3) + 32(2)$. Another example: $\gcd(1970, 2020) = 10$, and notice $10 = 2020(79) + 1970(-81)$. If we use the Euclidean Algorithm to find the GCD, we can use the data from the algorithm to find the values of $x$ and $y$ to make the combination work out, by running the algorithm in reverse. The process of doing so is called the **Extended Euclidean Algorithm**. Go watch this video to see how it works: https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hB34-GSDT3k  (There are many others you can watch too.) Then do the following: Look back at the 5-digit integers you used in task 1. Call those $a$ and $b$, and let the GCD be called $n$. Use the Extended Euclidean Algorithm to find values of $x$ and $y$ such that $ax + by = n$. Again, for example, if $a = 12345$ and $b = 34567$, you should have found that $\gcd(12345, 34567) = 1$; you would use the Extended Euclidean Algorithm to find that $12345(13824) + 34567(-4937) = 1$. Obviously show all the work in the Extended Euclidean Algorithm computation, and verify at the end that the combination does actually equal the GCD. 

## Assignment Expectations and Grading Criteria 

Please note, it is the case with all AEP's that **your grade is primarily based on your explanations and writing, and only secondarily on the precision and correctness of your computations.** Correct computations with insufficient explanation will need to be revised and may receive an "N" grade. 

AEPs are graded using the "EMRN" rubric found in the syllabus. **A grade of E or M requires all of the following to be met:**

- Task 1 must show all work in a clear, organized, and legible manner, and the GCD must be clearly indicated. 
- Task 2 must clearly state where the prime number $p$ was found; the prime number has to be the requested size; and the value of $g$ must work according to the Diffie-Hellman specifications (i.e. it must have no common factors with $p-1$ other than 1). And all work has to be shown in a clear, organized, and legible manner. 
- Task 1 must show all Extended Euclidean Algorithm work in a clear, organized, and legible manner. You do not need to repeat the work from the Euclidean Algorithm in task 1. 

A grade of "E" is given if all of the above expectations are met, and the work is of superior quality in terms of the clarity of explanations and work, appearance of the writeup, and precision of the mathematics. 


## Submitting your work 

**AEP submissions must be typewritten and saved as either a PDF or MS Word file. No part of your submission may involve handwriting; work that is submitted that contains handwriting will be graded N and returned without feedback.** This includes electronic handwritten docments, for example using a stylus and a note-taking app. To type up your work, you can use MS Word or Google Docs (both of which have equation editors for mathematical notation) or any other computer-based math typesetting tool. Just make sure you save your work as a Word document or PDF (no `.odt`, `.rtf`, or other file extensions are allowed).

When you have your work typed up, double-check it for neatness, correctness, and clarity. Then, go to Blackboard, then **Assignments**, then **AEP**, then **AEP 3**. Clicking on the text "AEP 3" will take you to a place on Blackboard where you can upload your work. All grading and revisions of labs are done entirely on Blackboard. **Do not email your work to the professor** -- only Blackboard submissions are accepted.

## Getting Help

Please note that according to the syllabus, for AEP's **"no interactions at all with another person or with unauthorized sources on the internet is allowed."** Violations of this rule include *any* consultation with other students or former students, including Math Center tutors; using work from another student or former student; submitting the problem set to an online help site such as Chegg or Coursehero; or asking for help in an online forum. All such violations will be treated as academic dishonesty and will result in a grade of "N" and being banned from revising the work. 

You **may** ask me (Talbert) for help on this assignment in the form of **specific mathematical or technical questions**. If I cannot answer a question because it would give too much away, I'll tell you so. **However please note: I will not "look over your work" before you submit it to give you feedback on the overall submission**; the expectations are clearly laid out above, so just follow those directions and submit your best work, and you'll be allowed to revise it if needed. 
 
**You can ask technology related questions to anyone at any time**. For example if you need help with Desmos, or with figuring out how to type up your work, there are no restrictions on that. I recommend the `#tech` channel on Campuswire so that you'll reach a large audience. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTg1MDQ0MjU5MV19
-->