# AEP 5: The Euclidean algorithm and modular inverses

## Overview 

In this AEP, you'll learn how to use the Extended Euclidean Algorithm to solve modular equations of the form $ab \ \% \ n = 1$ and explore the applications of this idea to cryptography.


**Learning Targets associated with this AEP:**

-   A.3: I can compute  `a % b`  given integers  `a`  and  `b`  and perform arithmetic mod $n$.

Remember, AEPs do not have fixed deadlines; simply work on this item until you are ready to submit it. But remember the **Two Items Per Week Rule.** 

## Technology Background

No particular tech skills needed for this AEP. 

## AEP Description and Tasks 

### What this AEP is about

In AEP 3, we learned about the **greatest common divisor** of two positive integers and how to use the **Euclidean Algorithm** to find it efficiently. We also learned that we can use the **Extended Eulidean Algorithm** to write the GCD of any two positive integers as a combination of those two integers. In AEP 5, we are going to explore how these ideas can be used to solve certain kinds of equations involving the modulus operator, which then becomes an important tool in breaking certain kinds of codes. 

>**This AEP requires that you be familiar with the Euclidean Algorithm and Extended Euclidean Algorithm from AEP 3.** While *completing* AEP 3 is not strictly a requirement for AEP 5, fluency with these two algorithms is. 

In your Algebra 1 class back in middle school or high school, you learned how to solve basic equations involving multiplication, like $3x = 1$. It's simple --- just divide both sides by 3 to get $x = 1/3$. What if we wanted to extend this idea to equations involving the modulus operator, like this one?

$$3x \ \% \ 7 = 1$$

This is significantly harder, because *the value of $x$ must be an integer*. That means we can't "divide by 3" because doing so would yield a non-integer result: 

$$x \ \% \ 7 = 1/3$$

But that doesn't make sense because $1/3$ isn't an integer. Instead, we need to find an *integer* $x$ that, when substituted in, yields a true statement. When the modulus is small (like here, where it's 7) we can do this through a brute-force search pretty easily, starting at 1: 

| Value of $x$ | Value of $3x$ | Value of $3x \ \% \ 7$ | 
|:--: | :--: | :--: | 
| 1 | 3 | 3 | 
| 2 | 6 | 6 | 
| 3 | 9 | 2 | 
| 4 | 12 | 5 | 
| 5 | 15 | 1 |

Having found an integer $x$ such that $3x \ \% \ 7 = 1$ --- namely $x =5$ --- we can stop because we've solved the equation. There are actually multiple solutions to this equation; $x = 12$ is another ($3 \times 12 = 36$ and $36 \ \% \ 7 = 1$), so are $x = 19, 26, 33, \dots$ --- any value of $x$ that is congruent to 5 modulo 7, will work. Because there are infinitely many solutions, we will just refer to the smallest positive solution as "the" solution. 

In algebra, we use a $-1$ exponent to denote a reciprocal, for example $3^{-1} = 1/3$. Note that $3 \times 1/3 = 1$. We will use that negative 1 exponent to mean something similar here: In the situation we just described, we would say that $3^{-1} \ \% \ 7 = 5$ since $(3 \times 5) \ \% \ 7 = 1$. The number 5 "acts like" the fraction 1/3 when looking at things mod 7. 

*Another example:* $4^{-1} \ \% \ 13 = 10$, because look what happens when you multiply 4 times 10: 

$$(4 \times 10) \ \% \ 13 = 40 \ \% \ 13 = 1$$


But notice that for some moduli, the simple equation we started with may be impossible to solve. For example, if we were given the equation $3x \ \% \ 6 = 1$ instead, then look what happens: 

| Value of $x$ | Value of $3x$ | Value of $3x \ \% \ 6$ | 
|:--: | :--: | :--: | 
| 1 | 3 | 3 | 
| 2 | 6 | 0 | 
| 3 | 9 | 3 | 
| 4 | 12 | 0 | 
| 5 | 15 | 3 |

...and so on. The value of $3x \ \% \ 6$ will just alternate between 0 and 3, because $3x$ is always either a multiple of $6$ (which happens when $x$ is even) or it's 3 plus a multiple of 6 (which happens when $x$ is odd). $3x \ \% \ 6$ never evaluates to 1. So $3x \ \% \ 6 = 1$ *has no solution*; and we would say $3^{-1} \ \% \ 6$ *does not exist*. 



### Tasks for this AEP

1. Find all of the following values and show your reasoning. If a value doesn't exist, say so (no explanation needed, but make sure you are correct!). 

   a) $5^{-1} \ \% \ 17$
   b) $13^{-1} \ \% \ 22$
   c) $11^{-1} \ \% \ 22$
   d) $21^{-1} \ \% \ 26$
   e) $4^{-1} \ \% \ 26$
   f) $17^{-1} \ \% \ 50$
   g) $8^{-1} \ \% \ 50$

2. Look at your data from the first question and any additional data you might generate through additional examples, and look at the values of $a$ and $n$ when $a^{-1} \ \% \ n$ exists. What is the value of $\gcd(a,n)$ in those situations? Use your observation to fill in the blank with a conjecture: 
 
**If $a,n$ are integers, then $a^{-1} \ \% \ n$ exists  if $\gcd(a,n)$ ____________.**

Now let's think about how we might find $a^{-1} \ \% \ n$ more efficiently than with a brute-force search. 

4. Let $a = 92$ and $n = 777$. Use the Euclidean Algorithm to show that $\gcd(a,n) = 1$, and then use the Extended Euclidean Algorithm to find integers $x$ and $y$ such that $92x + 777y = 1$. Be sure to show all your work here. 
5. Take the $x$ you found in the previous problem and let $x' = x \ \% \ 777$. Show (similarly to how you did this in the first problem) that $x' = 92^{-1} \ \% \ 777$. 
6. Repeat the idea from tasks 4 and 5 to calculate $1717^{-1} \ \% \ 202020$. 
7. Based on your previous items, write out an algorithm (in regular English, not in code) on how to calculate $a^{-1} \ \% \ n$ for any positive integers $a,n$. Include conditions under which this number will fail to exist and therefore the algorithm would immediately stop. 


8. Finally, we're going to connect this to give a hint to a solution for a problem on *another* AEP. Suppose $n, e$, and $d$ are positive integers and define $M = \frac{ed-1}{n}$. 

   a) Show that $ed + Mn = 1$. Make your reasoning clear. 
   b) Based on this fact, what can you conclude about the integers $e$ and $d$? Why? 
   c) How might the answer to part (b) give you a way to quickly and efficiently compute $d$ if you were given the values of $e$ and $n$? 

## Assignment Expectations and Grading Criteria 



__Restrictions you need to follow:__ 
+ You are not allowed to use any external libraries on this problem. All your code should be "from scratch". 
+ You are not allowed to use the `set` function that converts lists to sets. All of your objects in this assignment should be lists and remain lists. 

This AEP is unusual (for now) because there are no other problems to solve, just code to write. But it's still the case that **your grade is primarily based on your explanations and writing, and only secondarily on the precision and correctness of your computations.** What this means here is that **along with your code, you need to include verbal explanations of what your code is doing and why it works, as if you were explaining it in words to a human being**. 

In order to have both executable code and verbal explanations in the same place, **your work must be submitted as a Jupyter notebook** that combines your code with the verbal explanations of what your code does and why it works. Put your code in code cells, and your verbal explanations in text cells. How you organize it is up to you; you can put verbal explanations before each function, or you can have one large verbal explanation before or after all four of the functions. However, please *do not put all your verbal explanations in with the code as comments*; this is OK programming practice but it's hard to read. 

Here's an example of the kind of thing you should be creating: https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1EwzR9kRDQFpQCyImasA-wx6F9eTYN1WH?usp=sharing  Notice how the text is in a text cell, and how it explains what is happening in the code in (relatively) plain English. (Comments are turned on in this notebook, so if you have a question about something you see, leave a comment and I'll address it.) 

This assignment will be graded by running your code using a text file full of test cases I have prepared, and seeing if your code produces the right results; and by evaluating the quality of your verbal explanations. 

+ A grade of **E** is given if 100% of the test cases produce the correct results and if the verbal explanations provided are clear, correct, and well-written. 
+ A grade of **M** is given if 80% of the test cases produce the correct results verbal explanations provided are correct and reasonably well-written. 
+ A grade of **R** is given if fewer than 80% of the test cases produce the correct results; or if the verbal explanations provided are unclear, incorrect, or poorly written (either because of grammar/clarity issues or because they don't actually explain your code). 
+ A grade of **N** is given under any of the following conditions: 
	+ Your functions are named something other than the names stated in the problem. Because the grading is automated, they **must** be named `to_set`, `union`,  `intersect` (not "intersectION"), and `symmetric_diff`. *It's your responsibility to double check that you have spelled the names of the functions correctly.* 
	+ There is a syntax error in your code; i.e. when the code is executed with control-enter in the Jupyter notebook, an error is produced. *It's your responsibility to turn in work that is free of syntax errors*. 
	+ The verbal explanations are missing, incomplete, irrelevant, or contain significant issues with clarity or correctness. 
	+ There are significant omissions in the work, for example missing verbal explanations or one or more of the functions is not submitted. 
	+ There are significant issues with the formatting or organization of your notebook. 



## Submitting your work 

For this AEP, as mentioned above, your work needs to be packaged in a Jupyter notebook. Work not given as Jupyter notebooks will not be graded. 

The **preferred** way to do this is as follows: 

1. Write up your Jupyter notebook in [Colab](https://colab.research.google.com/). 
2. Change the sharing settings on your notebook so that **anyone with the link can edit** and then copy the link. [Here is a short video on how to do this](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1NiGdyw6strJBjIYX2-CDnO-iz8EW4l_E/view). 
3. In the AEP assignment, paste the link as "Submission text". There will be no file to upload this time; all I need is the link. I'll then open the link and check your code against my test cases. 

**Note: This process is different than sharing the notebook with just me, as many of you did with the Python/Jupyter crash course.** It turns out that sharing the notebook with just me, the email to me that contains the link ended up in my spam folder about 90% of the time. So, **please do it this way or I will probably not see your submission.** 

If you cannot carry out these steps or have some other process you prefer, please let me know first. 

## Getting Help

Please note that according to the syllabus, for AEP's **"no interactions at all with another person or with unauthorized sources on the internet is allowed."** Violations of this rule include *any* consultation with other students or former students, including Math Center tutors; using work from another student or former student; submitting the problem set to an online help site such as Chegg or Coursehero; or asking for help in an online forum. All such violations will be treated as academic dishonesty and will result in a grade of "N" and being banned from revising the work. 

You **may** ask me (Talbert) for help on this assignment in the form of **specific mathematical or technical questions**. If I cannot answer a question because it would give too much away, I'll tell you so. **However please note: I will not "look over your work" before you submit it to give you feedback on the overall submission**; the expectations are clearly laid out above, so just follow those directions and submit your best work, and you'll be allowed to revise it if needed. 
 
**You can ask technology related questions to anyone at any time**. For example if you need help with Desmos, or with figuring out how to type up your work, there are no restrictions on that. I recommend the `#tech` channel on Campuswire so that you'll reach a large audience. 
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNTQ3MTc4MDIwXX0=
-->