# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 2B: Exponentiation mod $n$ and more applications to cryptography

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Tuesday, September 15

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In Part A of this module, we learned about the *modulus* operator and how to do addition "mod n" along with subtraction and multiplication mod n, and representing negative numbers mod n. Part B of this module explores one other arithmetic operation done using the modulus operator: Raising integers to powers, or "exponentiation". Exponentiation turns out to be a fundamental building block of many cryptographic systems. In this lesson, we'll learn an algorithm for computing large powers (for example, $12^{100}$) mod $n$, in a very efficient way --- for example, although $12^{100}$ has 108 digits, computing `12^{100} % 10` never uses integers larger than 2 digits. We'll apply this to a cryptosystem that encrypts messages by converting letters to integers like the shift cipher, but then uses exponentiation rather than shifting. 


## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

+ A.3: I can compute `a % b` given integers `a` and `b` and perform modular arithmetic.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

  - Use the repeated squaring algorithm to evaluate powers of integers mod n.  

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

  - Apply the repeated squaring algorithm to encryption techniques that

## Resources for Learning

**Text:** There's no assigned text to read this time; the videos do it all. However, as always, Google searches will turn up a *lot* of material on the web in case you are needing more help. 

**Video:** Watch the following videos. The total running time is 18:35. 

- The Division Algorithm (6:51) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=XHjSy_MT7u0  This was created by me for the class MTH 210, but it also works for MTH 225. 
- The modulus operator (1:07) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=MrTtsX2Wg9Q This video just introduces notation -- it does not go into any depth. That's what the next video does: 
- The modulus operator (10:37) This video was made by me (Talbert) and can be found in the Module 2 folder. 

You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.

**Bonus material:** This page has some nice computer science applications of the modulus operator that you may find handy, along with links to additional explanations: [https://blog.mattclemente.com/2019/07/12/modulus-operator-modulo-operation.html](https://blog.mattclemente.com/2019/07/12/modulus-operator-modulo-operation.html)


## Exercises

The exercises for this assignment are found at Classkick this time. Go to http://app.classkick.com and sign in (as a "Portfolio" student). If prompted, use the code Q4L W99. 


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTM4MzgyMjg2OSwyMTM0MDM4OTg2XX0=
-->