As you all know, on Monday April 13 we will have our poster session for application projects in this class. This announcement contains logistical and procedural information that you _need to know_ in order to have a successful experience on that particular day. Please read this carefully, re-read it before the 13th, and come to class this week prepared to discuss your questions. 

## Where, When, and Who

The poster session will be in __LIB 002__, which is in the Mary Idema Pew library on the bottom floor adjacent to the atrium. Your poster session will be held during your class' normal meeting time on the 13th. 

__All members of your team must be present the entire time.__ In particular, __if an individual is not present for the entire time, that person will not receive a Pass mark on the Application Project__ which has significant repercussions for the semester grade. So make it your highest priority on the day of the presentation to be present and stay the entire time. 

Since there is some setup required, __at least one member of your team needs to be at the room between 15 and 30 minutes prior to the session's start time__ to set up your poster and equipment. The session will begin promptly at the top of the hour, and if your team is not ready, it could negatively affect your performance in the presentation. If you have a computer to set up, please _plan on having a designated team member at the room 30 minutes prior to the start time_ to get the technology set up. 

## Venue

LIB 002 is a "LearnLab" classroom specifically designed to support active work. Here are photos of the room that give you an idea of the layout: [http://imgur.com/gallery/0saRa/new](http://imgur.com/gallery/0saRa/new)

The 360-degree panoramic shot can also be found here, where you can pan and zoom around the room: [https://plus.google.com/photos/100623405897908280349/albums/6132384171575138241?authkey=CLnDovaJudKyOA](https://plus.google.com/photos/100623405897908280349/albums/6132384171575138241?authkey=CLnDovaJudKyOA)

The room is slightly larger than our classroom and has the following equipment: 

+ Five tables, with rounded half-circle tables on one end and 35" high definition monitors on the other end; each monitor also has a station where you can plug computers or tablets into the monitor
+ A smart board with a projector
+ Two pull-down screens with projectors

This configuration gives a variety of ways to display posters, which we discuss now. 

## Posters

There are three ways your team can prepare a poster for this presentation. 

1. As a large-form paper poster as you would create for a professional conference, like [this](https://rosiealexander.files.wordpress.com/2013/06/conference-poster.jpg) or [this](http://math.illinois.edu/~delcour2/jmmposter2009.jpg) or [this](https://science-math.wright.edu/sites/default/files/acs2012-andria-fortney-655x399.jpg).
2. As a science-fair style poster done on bi-fold or tri-fold boards, like [this](http://www.posterpresentations.com/assets/images/autogen/trifold-with-ipad.jpg) or [this](https://s-media-cache-ak0.pinimg.com/236x/00/8e/dc/008edc2495bd5b4b85da7c67d3acde0e.jpg) or [this](http://192.220.71.246/assets/images/autogen/bi-fold_250.jpg). 
3. As a "virtual poster", by creating a PDF that would ordinarily be printed out to make a conference poster, but instead displaying the PDF on a computer or TV display rather than paper. 

All three kinds of posters are made in the same way: by making a PDF using a template (see below) and then either having the PDF printed out (for the conference-style poster), printing out and then attaching to a board (for the bifold/trifold style poster), or displaying it on a computer or TV monitor (for virtual posters). 

At least ten days prior to the poster session, __read through the material at this website__: [http://www.ncsu.edu/project/posters/](http://www.ncsu.edu/project/posters/). It gives guidelines for layout, tips for making an effective poster, links to software templates for posters, and pictures of examples of effective posters. Again: __Read through this material prior to making your poster.__

Using the templates at the website, or other templates you might find on the internet, you'll need to decide whether your team will be presenting a conference-style poster, bifold/trifold poster, or virtual poster. 

+ If your team is doing a conference-style poster or bifold/trifold style poster, you'll need to print out the poster. __This is done at the IT Help Desk in the Mary Idema Pew library, bottom floor.__ Printing the poster costs $25 (at last check; this could be different now) and requires a 24-hour lead time due to the high volume of posters being printed out on the large plotter located in the Help Desk. 
+ If your team wants to do a virtual poster, there is no printing involved, but a virtual poster will appear smaller than its printed counterpart, so you will need to pay more attention to visibility and visual information. 

__IMPORTANT NOTE: We only have enough monitors to have five virtual posters.__ Therefore, if your team wants to use a virtual poster, you will need to email me with a rationale behind why you want the virtual poster. Priority in assigning virtual posters will be given to teams who cannot financially afford the cost of printing the paper poster. __These requests for virtual posters must be made no later than Wednesday, April 8__ so that I can prepare the room physically for the posters. Requests for virtual posters given after April 8 will not be considered, and it will be assumed you are using a paper poster. 

Please also note that it is OK to have both a paper poster and a laptop or tablet present. For example, teams in the past who have written software for their project have had a paper poster on display and a laptop running their software for visitors to play with. 

## What the Poster Session is Like

The poster session is not like a conference where one team gets up and gives a talk on their project, then another team gets up and does the same, and so on until we run out of groups. Instead, in the poster session, teams will set up their posters at designated locations in the venue for the session, and people will come and go freely throughout the group, visiting posters that they think are interesting and asking questions. It’s more along the lines of a science fair than a conference.

The whole point of the poster session is that it is a *public* display of your work. People from all over GVSU may be stopping in to see what you’ve been doing. Some visitors will have a lot of computing knowledge but no knowledge of your problem; others will have no computing or math knowledge but saw your poster and thought it looked interesting. The challenge — and the main thing that makes the poster presentation a powerful learning experience for you — is to be able to explain your work to both of these audiences and all people in between.

During the poster session, posters will be set up around the room, including the tables, walls, and monitors. People (including your classmates as well as visitors from outside the class and random passersby) will be stopping at the posters to see what they’re about. Each team will have a representative present at its table to interact with the visitors, either answering their questions or giving a brief and simple explanation of their work. Every now and then, the team representative who is manning the table will switch with a teammate and go visit the other posters, while the new teammate takes over the visitor-interaction duties. The professor is the “head visitor”, visiting each poster and asking questions and evaluating the team's work. It’s a very lively and active atmosphere, with a lot of talking and movement and learning going on.

## What to Do Prior to the Poster Session

__What you should be doing now:__ You should be wrapping up your actual work on the project and start preparing for the poster session itself by reading the website above and thinking about what you want to do and say. 

__What you should be doing 7--10 days before the poster session:__ You should be doing two things: (1) making the poster itself, and (2) preparing a brief "[elevator pitch](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Elevator_pitch)" about your project. The NCSU website linked above is the go-to place to learn about how to make effective posters. The "pitch" that you will give visitors to your poster is a brief and simple overview of your problem and how you solved it. The pitch should be less than 3 minutes in length and understandable to someone with minimal mathematics and computing background. This is much harder than it sounds, because explaining technical ideas in a nontechnical is challenging. [Here is some advice](http://www.mindtools.com/pages/article/elevator-pitch.htm) on how to make a compelling pitch to a person. 

__What you should be doing 3--6 days before the poster session:__ Finalize and print out (if necessary) your poster, and have _each member_ of your group practice the elevator pitch in front of the others. Remember _each_ team member will take turns manning the poster, and you will not know in advance when I will be around to your poster to evaluate it, so all team members must be equally adept at pitching your work. 

Remember that IT Help Desk requires a 24-hour lead time for printing off posters, so this _must_ be completed by the weekend prior to April 13. 

## What Happens During the Poster Session

See "When, Where, and Who" above for information on the venue. Again, it's important that at least one member of the team be at the room 15-30 minutes prior to the session to set up. If you have a computer to set up, be there 30 minutes early. 

This presentation is to be thought of as a formal event. You will be expected to dress and act appropriately. Please wear “business casual” clothing (see [http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_casual](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Business_casual) for what that means for men and for women) and make sure you are sufficiently awake and ready to work.

Shortly before the hour, you’ll be given some instructions and some forms for evaluating other teams’ projects. At the top of the hour, we begin the session.

During the session, each student will be responsible for two distinct activities during the poster session:

1. Taking turns being the person “on duty” at your poster, interacting with visitors, and
2. When you are not “on duty”, visiting other teams’ posters and evaluating their work.

The 50-minute period will be broken up into three shifts of about 10-15 minutes in length. During each shift, one member of the team should be the person on duty at the poster, answering questions and talking about your work to visitors; the off-duty team members will be tasked with visiting the other teams. At the end of 10-15 minutes a shift change will be announced, and the current on-duty person switches roles with one of the other team members.

I’ll be circulating around to each poster during the session, listening to your explanations you give to others and asking you some of my own questions. And when it’s time to change shifts, I will call out those shift changes.

In the process of visiting other teams’ projects, it is expected that **each team will visit all the other teams’ projects over the course of 50 minutes**. This doesn’t mean each person should visit all the other teams’ projects; this work should be split up among the team members. You’ll be provided with a list of the projects being presented so that you can plan out who is going to visit which project. You will also be provided with a form that will help you in the evaluation process. __Part of whether your work is given a Pass or No Pass mark will come from these peer evaluations__. For example, if my personal evaluation of your work is Pass but a large number of students and visitors give your work a poor rating, then I might reconsider; conversely if I am on the fence about Pass versus No Pass, peer evaluations will be the deciding factor. So you are highly incentivized to make a good impression on all visitors. 

## After the Poster Session

The executive summary for your team's project is due in to me by the end of class on the day of the project presentation. I prefer an electronic submission. Otherwise, the only thing you need to do once the session is over is dismantle your poster and equipment and submit any peer evaluation forms you have. 

In class on April 17 (the last day of Winter classes) we will spend some time debriefing the poster session and gathering informal feedback on your experiences. 

## Questions? 

You will undoubtedly have questions as the time approaches, and those are always welcome in any form. 
