activities/module1-planning.md, before:

# Planning for MTH 225 Module 1

Focus: Integer representation and binary arithmetic 

+ Day 1: Representation in different bases including two's complement 
+ Day 2: Binary arithmetic

## 1. Learning objectives 

LT's: 

+ A.1: I can represent an integer in base 2, 8, 10, and 16.
+ A.2 (Core): I can add and multiply two integers written in binary.

Micro-objectives: (Bold ones are day 1)

- **Convert an integer from base 10 into bae 2, 8, and 16 and vice versa.** 
- **Implement the division/remainder algorithm for converting from decimal to base $r$**. 
- **Represent a signed integer using 2's complement and convert a signed integer from base 8, 10, or 16 into binary using 2's complement.**
- Add, subtract, and multiply two binary integers (without changing representation). 
- Find the quotient and remainder when dividing one binary integer by another. 


## 2. Sort 

Day 1 in order: 

- **Convert an integer from base 10 into bae 2, 8, and 16 and vice versa.** 
- **Represent a signed integer using 2's complement and convert a signed integer from base 8, 10, or 16 into binary using 2's complement.**
- **Implement the division/remainder algorithm for converting from decimal to base $r$**. 

Day 2 in order: Same as above. 


## 3. Sketch of in-class activity 

- Review and QA over pre-class 
- Conceptual polling questions:
  - How to tell if binary integer is even 
  - When we multiply a number in base 8 by 8, what happens? 
- Representing signed integers with 2's complement 
- Basic practice with changing representations using the algorithm 
- (Maybe) Preview: Add 1 + 1 in binary. Add 2 + 2 in binary (10 + 10 + 100). Add 2 + 3 (10 + 11 = 101)

Followup activities: 

- Randomly generated decimals, convert all to binary using the algorithm and show work. (Can check on WA)
- Randomly generated signed decimals, convert to base 2, 8, 16 using 2's complement

Commit message:

Add Templates and Module 1 in class activity

activities/module1-planning.md, after:

# Planning for MTH 225 Module 1

Focus: Integer representation and binary arithmetic 

+ Day 1: Representation in different bases including two's complement 
+ Day 2: Binary arithmetic

## 1. Learning objectives 

LT's: 

+ A.1: I can represent an integer in base 2, 8, 10, and 16.
+ A.2 (Core): I can add and multiply two integers written in binary.

Micro-objectives: (Bold ones are day 1)

- **Convert an integer from base 10 into bae 2, 8, and 16 and vice versa.** 
- **Implement the division/remainder algorithm for converting from decimal to base $r$**. 
- Represent a signed integer using 2's complement and convert a signed integer from base 8, 10, or 16 into binary using 2's complement.
- Add, subtract, and multiply two binary integers (without changing representation). 
- Find the quotient and remainder when dividing one binary integer by another. 


## 2. Sort 

Day 1 in order: 

- **Convert an integer from base 10 into bae 2, 8, and 16 and vice versa.** 
- **Implement the division/remainder algorithm for converting from decimal to base $r$**. 

Day 2 in order: Same as above. 


## 3. Sketch of in-class activity 

Day 1

- Review and QA over pre-class 
- Conceptual polling questions:
  - How to tell if binary integer is even 
  - When we multiply a number in base 8 by 8, what happens? 
- Basic practice with changing representations using the algorithm 
- Minilecture: bin/dec/oct/hex in Python (Or make a video) (Or set up a Jupyter notebook) 

Day 2

Include 2's complement here 

- Review and QA over pre-class
- Conceptual polling questions 
  - Review from Day 1
  - What is the sum of 111 and 011? 
  - The difference? 
  - The product? 
  - The quotient and remainder? 
  - Review of process
  - 
- Students work out examples in pairs on Jamboard -- then go over answers 


Followup activities: 

Day 1

- Randomly generated decimals, convert all to binary using the algorithm and show work. (Can check on WA)
- Randomly generated signed decimals, convert to base 2, 8, 16 using 2's complement 


Day 2

- Just more examples with each operation
