225-learningobjectives.md, before:

# Learning Objectives for MTH 225

## From Syllabus of Record

1. Compute basic numerical and symbolic expressions involving numbers in different bases, modular arithmetic, sets, functions, and symbolic logic.
2. Solve complex counting problems using computational thinking and the tools of combinatorics.
3. Formulate computational problems in terms of sets, functions, logic, and combinatorics.
4. Write clear, correct, and convincing arguments to explain the correctness of a solution using combinatorial proof and mathematical induction.
5. Apply effective problem-solving skills in solving computational problems.
6. Explain methods and solutions of computational problems in a clear way to a specified target audience.
7. Demonstrate fluency in applying computer programming in the formulation and solutions of mathematical problems.
8. Assess one's own work in mathematical problem solving and apply feedback to make improvements to one's own work

## Converting into blocks/groups

+ Group A: Represent integers using different number bases, and perform integer arithmetic using different bases and modular arithmetic. 
  + A.1: I can represent an integer in base 2, 8, 10, and 16. 
  + A.2: I can perform binary arithmetic. 
  + A.3: I can compute `a % b` given integers `a` and `b` and perform arithmetic mod `n`.  
+ Group L: Formulate, manipulate, and determine the truth of logical expressions using symbolic logic. 
  + L.1: I can use propositional variables and logical connectives to represent statements; and interpret symbolic logical statements in plain language. 
  + L.2: I can write the negation, converse, and contrapositive of a conditional statement and use DeMorgan's Laws to simplify symbolic logical expressions. 
  + L.3: I can determine whether a quantified statement is true, false, or underdetermined, and state its negation. 
  + L.4: I can write the truth table for a logical statement.
  + L.5: I can determine if a statement is a tautology and whether two statements are logically equivalent. 
+ Group SF: Formulate and solve computational problems using sets and functions. 
  + S.1: I can represent a set in roster notation and set-builder notation; determine if an object is an element of a set; and determine set relationships (equality, subset). 
  + S.2: I can perform operations on sets (intersection, union, complement, Cartesian product) and determine the cardinality of a set. 
  + S.3: I can determine whether or not a given relation is a function, determine the domain and codomain of a function, and find the image and preimage of a point using a function. 
  + S.4: I can determine whether a function is injective, surjective, or bijective. 
+ Group C: Formulate and solve complex counting problems using computational thinking and the tools of combinatorics. 
  + C.1: I can use the additive and multiplicative principles and the Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.2: I can calculate a binomial coefficient and correctly apply the binomial coefficient to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.3: I can compute combinations and permutations and apply these to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.4: I can use the "Stars and Bars" technique to formulate and solve counting problems. 
+ Group SR: Evaluate numerical and other sequences using recursion, and solve simple recurrence relations. 
  + SR.1: I can generate several values in a sequence defined using a closed-form expression or using recursion. 
  + SR.2: I can use sigma notation to rewrite a sum and determine the sum of an expression given in sigma notation. 
  + SR.3: I can find closed-form and recursive expressions for arithmetic and geometric sequences and find their sums. 
  + SR.4: I can determine if a given sequence is $\Delta^k$-constant and find a polynomial fit if it is. 
  + SR.5: I can use iteration and characteristic roots to solve a recurrence relation. 
+ Group P: Write clear, correct, and convincing arguments to explain the correctness of a solution using combinatorial proof and mathematical induction.
  + P.1: I can analyze and write a combinatorial proof of a combinatorial identity. 
  + P.2: Given a statement to be proven by (weak) induction, I can state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the proof. 
+ Group CS: Demonstrate problem solving, communication,and learning skills appropriate for computer science.  
  + CS.1: I can explain the reasoning behind solutions to computational problems clearly to an appropriate audience. 
  + CS.2: I can apply computer programming and computational thinking to frame and solve mathematical and computational problems. 
  + CS.3: I can self-assess my work and apply feedback from others to make improvements in my work. 

**Eliminated:**

+ L.6: I can determine if a deduction rule is logically valid
+ S.3: I can create and interpret Venn diagrams.
+ SR.5: I can find a recurrence relation with initial conditions for a given sequence.

Commit message:

Add notes for meetings, activities, assessments

225-learningobjectives.md, after:

# Learning Objectives for MTH 225

## From Syllabus of Record

1. Compute basic numerical and symbolic expressions involving numbers in different bases, modular arithmetic, sets, functions, and symbolic logic.
2. Solve complex counting problems using computational thinking and the tools of combinatorics.
3. Formulate computational problems in terms of sets, functions, logic, and combinatorics.
4. Write clear, correct, and convincing arguments to explain the correctness of a solution using combinatorial proof and mathematical induction.
5. Apply effective problem-solving skills in solving computational problems.
6. Explain methods and solutions of computational problems in a clear way to a specified target audience.
7. Demonstrate fluency in applying computer programming in the formulation and solutions of mathematical problems.
8. Assess one's own work in mathematical problem solving and apply feedback to make improvements to one's own work

## Converting into blocks/groups

+ Group A: Represent integers using different number bases, and perform integer arithmetic using different bases and modular arithmetic. 
  + A.1: I can represent an integer in base 2, 8, 10, and 16. 
  + A.2*: I can add and multiply two integers written in binary. 
  + A.3: I can compute `a % b` given integers `a` and `b` and perform arithmetic mod `n`.  
+ Group L: Formulate, manipulate, and determine the truth of logical expressions using symbolic logic. 
  + L.1: I can use propositional variables and logical connectives to represent statements; and interpret symbolic logical statements in plain language. 
  + L.2*: I can write the negation, converse, and contrapositive of a conditional statement and use DeMorgan's Laws to simplify symbolic logical expressions. 
  + L.3: I can determine whether a quantified statement is true, false, or underdetermined, and state its negation. 
  + L.4*: I can write the truth table for a logical statement.
  + L.5: I can determine if a statement is a tautology and whether two statements are logically equivalent. 
+ Group SF: Formulate and solve computational problems using sets and functions. 
  + S.1*: I can represent a set in roster notation and set-builder notation; determine if an object is an element of a set; and determine set relationships (equality, subset). 
  + S.2: I can perform operations on sets (intersection, union, complement, Cartesian product) and determine the cardinality of a set. 
  + S.3*: I can determine whether or not a given relation is a function, determine the domain and codomain of a function, and find the image and preimage of a point using a function. 
  + S.4: I can determine whether a function is injective, surjective, or bijective. 
+ Group C: Formulate and solve complex counting problems using computational thinking and the tools of combinatorics. 
  + C.1*: I can use the additive and multiplicative principles and the Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.2: I can calculate a binomial coefficient and correctly apply the binomial coefficient to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.3*: I can compute combinations and permutations and apply these to formulate and solve counting problems. 
  + C.4: I can use the "Stars and Bars" technique to formulate and solve counting problems. 
+ Group SR: Evaluate numerical and other sequences using recursion, and solve simple recurrence relations. 
  + SR.1*: I can generate several values in a sequence defined using a closed-form expression or using recursion. 
  + SR.2: I can use sigma notation to rewrite a sum and determine the sum of an expression given in sigma notation. 
  + SR.3*: I can find closed-form and recursive expressions for arithmetic and geometric sequences and find their sums. 
  + SR.4: I can determine if a given sequence is $\Delta^k$-constant and find a polynomial fit if it is. 
  + SR.5: I can use iteration and characteristic roots to solve a recurrence relation. 
+ Group P: Write clear, correct, and convincing arguments to explain the correctness of a solution using combinatorial proof and mathematical induction.
  + P.1: I can analyze and write a combinatorial proof of a combinatorial identity. 
  + P.2*: Given a statement to be proven by (weak) induction, I can state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the proof. 
+ Group CS: Demonstrate problem solving, communication,and learning skills appropriate for computer science.  
  + CS.1: I can explain the reasoning behind solutions to computational problems clearly to an appropriate audience. 
  + CS.2: I can apply computer programming and computational thinking to frame and solve mathematical and computational problems. 
  + CS.3: I can self-assess my work and apply feedback from others to make improvements in my work. 

**Eliminated:**

+ L.6: I can determine if a deduction rule is logically valid
+ S.3: I can create and interpret Venn diagrams.
+ SR.5: I can find a recurrence relation with initial conditions for a given sequence.


## Assessing these

+ All but the last three: Done through LT assessments like MTH 201. 
+ Last three: Done through a portfolio that students submit. Put together some instances of your work and explain why you think they meet the objectives (perhaps through videoconference in finals week?)
