README.md, before:

# Overview 

This repository contains materials for MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1) and MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2) at [Grand Valley State University](http://gvsu.edu). These materials were created and are maintained by me, [Robert Talbert](http://rtalbert.org). 

Everything here is free and licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/us/). This means you can copy, fork, etc. freely as long as you give me attribution. 

For more information, contact me at talbertr@gvsu.edu or visit my website at http://rtalbert.org. 

## How this is organized

The top-level directory contains: 

- A folder for the scripts and captions, for the instructional videos I made for this course. [Those videos are located here.](https://vimeo.com/showcase/8667148). 
- A subfolder for each instance of the course, beginning in Fall 2021. I don't teach the course every semester so there are only subfolders for the times when I do teach it. **Specific course materials like syllabi, assessments, and so on are in the subfolders.** 
- A folder for an archive of instances of the course prior to Fall 2021. In particular, **all the materials for MTH 325 are in the archive**; everything else is MTH 225. 

Additionally, the most recent version of the syllabus for MTH 225 is located here: *Link will be put here in April 2022*

Commit message:

Relocate assessments and course docs to F21 folder and update README

README.md, after:

# Overview 

This repository contains materials for MTH 225 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1) and MTH 325 (Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2) at [Grand Valley State University](http://gvsu.edu). These materials were created and are maintained by me, [Robert Talbert](http://rtalbert.org). 

Everything here is free and licensed under a [Creative Commons Attribution-ShareAlike 3.0 license](http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-sa/3.0/us/). Please click the link or the `LICENSE.md` file to learn the terms of the license. Basically, you can use and reuse whatever you want as long as you give me attribution as the author. 

For more information, contact me at talbertr@gvsu.edu or visit my website at http://rtalbert.org. 

## How things are organized

There are two different courses housed in this repo, MTH 225 and MTH 325. While there are a lot of similarities between different instances of the same course, they're different enough to warrant keeping them in separate directories. These are labeled with the **course name** followed by a hyphen followed by the **semester**. For example, my MTH 325 class coming up in Fall 2022 is in `MTH 325-Fall2022`. 

Then, within each course you will find subdirectories for different materials. If you are specifically looking for syllabi, them those are usually in a directory called `course-documentation`. 

There are some archival directories at the top level: 

- `video` is contains the scripts and captions, for the instructional videos I made for this course. [Those videos are located here.](https://vimeo.com/showcase/8667148). 
- `archive` contains instances of the course prior to Fall 2021.
