MTH325-Fall2024/assignments/Proof problems F24.md, before:

# MTH 325 Proof problems -- Fall 2024

## Instructions for all Proof Problems 

**You do not have to do all of the problems below.** You only need to complete **six (6) successful Proofs** for an A in the class, and **three (3) successful proofs** for a B. No proofs are required for a C or below. 

**Problems will be added regularly throughout the semester** as we explore more content. It is expected that we will end with about 10-14 problems in all. 

Your job is to **find problems that look interesting to you and then solve them**. "Solve" here means **write a complete, correct, and polished proof** for the statement that's given in the problem. [Please see the Standards for Students Work document](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/Standards%20for%20Student%20Work%20W24.md) for details of what this involves. Among the criteria for acceptable work are these important points: 

- Your work must constitute a **good-faith effort at a completed proof**. You may not write up part of a proof and leave other parts of it incomplete or blank. 
- Your work must be **free from serious errors** in computation, logic, factual knowledge, and semantics. 
- Your work must **look professional** and **explain your reasoning clearly**. Proofs that are just computations (a "wall of math") will need to be revised. 

There is no one right way to write a proof! **Proofs are highly personalized, and the same statement can be proven many different ways**. A proof is just a clear, correct, and convincing explanation why a statement is always true. It does not have to conform to any particular method like induction, contradiction, etc. If you feel you can give an argument for why a statement below is true that is clear, correct, and convincing and it doesn't look like one of the basic arguments we explored in class, give it a try. 

To submit a proof for grading, do the following: 

- **Type up** your proof using a word processor or other computer program that allows for entry of mathematical notation. Microsoft Word, Google Docs, and Open Office Writer all have built-in equation editors you can use to insert mathematical notation. **No handwritten work is accepted** -- any submission that is handwritten will be marked "Revise" and returned without any feedback on the work itself (other than a note about typing up your work). 
- **Save your work as either a PDF or Microsoft Word (`.docx`) file**. No other file format is accepted because Blackboard won't let me leave feedback on the submission if it's not PDF or Word. 
- Put **one problem per file**. If you have proofs for 2-3 different problems, submit them separately in separate files. 
- When you are ready to submit your work, **upload the PDF or Word document to Blackboard** by going to the course Blackboard site, then the *Assignments* folder, then the *Proof Problems* folder, and then to the "assignment" for that problem. (For example if you are submitting a proof for Problem 2, look for "Proof Problem 2".) 

You may make **up to three submissions per week**: Proofs of three new problems, a new proof plus two old ones, or any other combination. 

Proof problems are graded periodically through the week, often in batches on Mondays and Wednesdays. Once you submit a proof, check back to see if it has been graded or check the Grading Status Board. If it has not been graded yet, it will be soon --- all graded work will be graded within seven business days of submission. Please do not email for status updates. 




---

## Proof Problem 1

Recall from MTH 225 that the [binomial coefficient](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Combinatorics/Binomial+coefficient) $\binom{n}{k}$ is the number of ways to select $k$ elements from an $n$-element set (irrespective of ordering). It can also be interpreted as the number of $k$-element subsets of an $n$-element set; or as the number of bitstrings of length $n$ that have exactly $k$ `1` bits. 

A fundamental identity for the binomial coefficient is this, which you also learned in MTH 225: 

$$\binom{n}{k} = \binom{n-1}{k} + \binom{n-1}{k-1}$$

For an explanation why this recurrence relation holds, [click here](https://vimeo.com/714228899).

**Prove** that, for all positive integers $n$, the following equality holds for the binomial coefficient: 

$$\binom{n}{0}2^0 + \binom{n}{1}2^1 + \binom{n}{2}2^2 + \cdots + \binom{n}{n}2^n = 3^n$$

*Pro tip*: There is a closed formula for the binomial coefficient, namely $\binom{n}{k} = \frac{n!}{(n-k)! k!}$. You are highly advised *not* to use that formula in this problem -- the algebra that results is truly awful. 



## Proof Problem 2

See Problem 1 for some background on the binomial coefficient. **Prove** that for all integers $n \geq 0$ and $i \geq 0$, 

$$\binom{0}{i} + \binom{1}{i} + \binom{2}{i} + \cdots + \binom{n}{i} = \binom{n+1}{i+1}$$

Note: If $a < b$ then $\binom{a}{b} = 0$. For example $\binom{1}{3} = 0$. 


Example of what this equality is saying: Suppose $i = 3$ and $n=4$. Then on the left we have
$\binom{0}{3} + \binom{1}{3} + \binom{2}{3} + \binom{3}{3} + \binom{4}{3}$ which you can verify equals $0 + 0 + 0 + 1 + 4 = 5$. On the other hand, on the right of the equation we would have $\binom{5}{4}$, and this also equals $5$. 

*Pro tip:* Induction might be a good option on this one. But what is the correct variable to use for the induction?

Commit message:

Add link and initial deadlines to Proof problems

MTH325-Fall2024/assignments/Proof problems F24.md, after:

# MTH 325 Proof problems -- Fall 2024

## Instructions for all Proof Problems 


**You do not have to do all of the problems below.** You only need to complete **six (6) successful Proofs** for an A in the class, and **three (3) successful proofs** for a B. No proofs are required for a C or below. 

**Problems will be added regularly throughout the semester** as we explore more content. It is expected that we will end with about 10-14 problems in all. 

Your job is to **find problems that look interesting to you and then solve them**. "Solve" here means **write a complete, correct, and polished proof** for the statement that's given in the problem. [Please see the Standards for Students Work document](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/Standards%20for%20Student%20Work%20W24.md) for details of what this involves. Among the criteria for acceptable work are these important points: 

- Your work must constitute a **good-faith effort at a completed proof**. You may not write up part of a proof and leave other parts of it incomplete or blank. 
- Your work must be **free from serious errors** in computation, logic, factual knowledge, and semantics. 
- Your work must **look professional** and **explain your reasoning clearly**. Proofs that are just computations (a "wall of math") will need to be revised. 

There is no one right way to write a proof! **Proofs are highly personalized, and the same statement can be proven many different ways**. A proof is just a clear, correct, and convincing explanation why a statement is always true. It does not have to conform to any particular method like induction, contradiction, etc. If you feel you can give an argument for why a statement below is true that is clear, correct, and convincing and it doesn't look like one of the basic arguments we explored in class, give it a try. 

To see several examples of proofs that would be marked **Success**, proofs that would be marked **Revise**, and proofs that would not be considered good-faith attempts, please see [this document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/111EUAtMIBdRJao1J_g18G_adQrfviHqCtY21Eda0dns/edit?usp=sharing). (https://docs.google.com/document/d/111EUAtMIBdRJao1J_g18G_adQrfviHqCtY21Eda0dns/edit?usp=sharing) 


To submit a proof for grading, do the following: 

- **Type up** your proof using a word processor or other computer program that allows for entry of mathematical notation. Microsoft Word, Google Docs, and Open Office Writer all have built-in equation editors you can use to insert mathematical notation. **No handwritten work is accepted** -- any submission that is handwritten will be marked "Revise" and returned without any feedback on the work itself (other than a note about typing up your work). 
- **Save your work as either a PDF or Microsoft Word (`.docx`) file**. No other file format is accepted because Blackboard won't let me leave feedback on the submission if it's not PDF or Word. 
- Put **one problem per file**. If you have proofs for 2-3 different problems, submit them separately in separate files. 
- When you are ready to submit your work, **upload the PDF or Word document to Blackboard** by going to the course Blackboard site, then the *Assignments* folder, then the *Proof Problems* folder, and then to the "assignment" for that problem. (For example if you are submitting a proof for Problem 2, look for "Proof Problem 2".) 

You may make **up to three submissions per week**: Proofs of three new problems, a new proof plus two old ones, or any other combination. 

Proof problems are graded periodically through the week, often in batches on Mondays and Wednesdays. Once you submit a proof, check back to see if it has been graded or check the Grading Status Board. If it has not been graded yet, it will be soon --- all graded work will be graded within seven business days of submission. Please do not email for status updates. 




---

## Proof Problem 1

**Initial deadline: 11:59pm ET, Saturday September 28** 

Recall from MTH 225 that the [binomial coefficient](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Combinatorics/Binomial+coefficient) $\binom{n}{k}$ is the number of ways to select $k$ elements from an $n$-element set (irrespective of ordering). It can also be interpreted as the number of $k$-element subsets of an $n$-element set; or as the number of bitstrings of length $n$ that have exactly $k$ `1` bits. 

A fundamental identity for the binomial coefficient is this, which you also learned in MTH 225: 

$$\binom{n}{k} = \binom{n-1}{k} + \binom{n-1}{k-1}$$

For an explanation why this recurrence relation holds, [click here](https://vimeo.com/714228899).

**Prove** that, for all positive integers $n$, the following equality holds for the binomial coefficient: 

$$\binom{n}{0}2^0 + \binom{n}{1}2^1 + \binom{n}{2}2^2 + \cdots + \binom{n}{n}2^n = 3^n$$

*Pro tip*: There is a closed formula for the binomial coefficient, namely $\binom{n}{k} = \frac{n!}{(n-k)! k!}$. You are highly advised *not* to use that formula in this problem -- the algebra that results is truly awful. 



## Proof Problem 2

**Initial deadline: 11:59pm ET, Saturday September 28** 


See Problem 1 for some background on the binomial coefficient. **Prove** that for all integers $n \geq 0$ and $i \geq 0$, 

$$\binom{0}{i} + \binom{1}{i} + \binom{2}{i} + \cdots + \binom{n}{i} = \binom{n+1}{i+1}$$

Note: If $a < b$ then $\binom{a}{b} = 0$. For example $\binom{1}{3} = 0$. 


Example of what this equality is saying: Suppose $i = 3$ and $n=4$. Then on the left we have
$\binom{0}{3} + \binom{1}{3} + \binom{2}{3} + \binom{3}{3} + \binom{4}{3}$ which you can verify equals $0 + 0 + 0 + 1 + 4 = 5$. On the other hand, on the right of the equation we would have $\binom{5}{4}$, and this also equals $5$. 

*Pro tip:* Induction might be a good option on this one. But what is the correct variable to use for the induction?
