# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 11B: The characteristic root technique

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Thursda, November 19** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In this part of Module 11, we're going to look at a computational method for building solutions to a particular kind of recurrence relation, called a *linear homogeneous* recurrence relation. It involves swapping the recurrence relation out with a related second-degree polynomial (something that looks like $ax^2 + bx + c$) and then using the quadratic formula to find its roots, then translating this back into recurrence relations. It's called the **characteristic root technique** and is a foolproof, if somewhat involved, way of constructing closed-form solutions. 



## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SR.4:** I can use iteration and characteristic roots to solve a recurrence relation.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- (*Review*) Find the roots of a second-degree polynomial by using the Quadratic Formula. 
- State the *order* of a recurrence relation and state what it means for a recurrence relation to be *linear* and *homogeneous*; and given a collection of recurrence relations, identify the ones that are linear, homogeneous, and either first or second order. 
- Given a first- or second-order linear homogeneous recurrence relation, state its *characteristic polynomial* and find its roots.


**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Given a first- or second-order linear homogeneous recurrence relation, state its *characteristic polynomial*, find its roots; if the roots are not repeated, construct a closed-form solution for the recurrence relation and check that it works. 
- Given a first- or second-order linear homogeneous recurrence relation, state its *characteristic polynomial*, find its roots; if the roots *are* repeated, construct a closed-form solution for the recurrence relation and check that it works. 

## Resources for Learning

**Video:** First, here is a refresher on the quadratic formula: 

- How to solve quadratic equations using the quadratic formula (5:56) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlNAJl36-10

Next, here are three videos covering the material for this module. These were made (by me) back in 2016 when we covered this material in MTH 325 instead of MTH 225. 


**Reading:** Read through [Section 2.4 of the Levin text](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_recurrence.html), only up through Example 2.4.5.  (Module 11B picks up with "The Characteristic Root Technique".) 

**Video:** No *required* videos this time; in fact a lot of YouTube videos on this are not great (or are well made but focus on a technique we are not covering in Module 11A) so be careful if you go searching. 



## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLScTI6ZFuNu6F6R4kISt5ONwpu_mYRI_UjLsAW1X_PMKhtSbvQ/viewform


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTU1MjIyMDM5XX0=
-->