# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 11A: Solving recurrence relations

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Tuesday, November 17** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

Module 11 is focused entirely on *recurrence relations*, which we first encountered when studying the binomial coefficient (Module 7B) and studied in further detail in Module 10. We saw that a recurrence relation is a recursive way of defining a sequence of integers, and that those recursive definitions can sometimes also be written as *closed formulas* that allow us to directly compute a term of a sequence without recursion. In Module 11A, we're going to look at some techniques for coming up with closed formulas for recurrence relations and how to check to see if a closed formula actually "solves" a recurrence relation. Two specific ways are discussed here -- *telescoping* (looking at the differences between terms and seeing if a pattern emerges when we add those differences up) and *iteration* (writing out partial sums of a sequence and looking for a pattern). 



## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

- **C.4**: I can use the "Stars and Bars" technique to formulate and solve counting problems.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Explain the kinds of problems that are solved by the stars-and-bars technique. 
- Given a problem that is solved using the stars-and-bars technique, draw the stars-and-bars chart for it. 
- Given a stars-and-bars for a counting problem, state the distribution of items that goes along with it. 


**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Given a counting problem, identify whether stars-and-bars applies, and if so, solve the problem. 

## Resources for Learning

**Reading:** The introduction to [this section (1.5) in the Levin textbook](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_stars-and-bars.html) is very good this time, so read it carefully and follow along with the example it gives. Then study the other examples and try some of the interactive exercises at the end. 

**Video:** There are numerous videos for the stars and bars method, but I recommend this one in particular: 

- Stars and bars (and bagels) (16:11) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTCScjoPymA   

It's long, but very well done and engaging. When you watch it, note that **the actual application of stars and bars doesn't appear until the 6:00 mark** --- the first part of the video is setting up a way to solve the problem that *doesn't* work particularly well, so that you'll appreciate the simplicity of the stars-and-bars method. If you find yourself getting a little lost in the first 6 minutes, that's actually intentional. 


## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://bit.ly/37N0NPw 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbLTE5NzcyNTM0MjldfQ==
-->