# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 3A: Statements and logical connectives

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Sunday, September 20

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In Module 3, we shift from looking at *numbers* to looking at the *logic* behind mathematics and computer science. Logic is what makes computers and programs work, and in this module we will learn how logic works! Part A of Module 3 focuses on distinguishing *logical statements* from non-statements, five important kinds of basic logical statements and the conditions under which they are true, and a special focus on *conditional statements* and different ways of stating them. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

+ **L.1:** I can use propositional variables and logical connectives to represent statements; and interpret symbolic logical statements in plain language. 
+ **L.2 (Core):** I can write the negation, converse, and contrapositive of a conditional statement and use DeMorgan's Laws to simplify symbolic logical expressions. 

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Differentiate between a statement and a non-statement. 
- Determine whether a statement is atomic or molecular; if molecular, identify the atomic statements that make it up. 
- State the conditions under which a conjunction, disjunction, conditional, biconditional, and negation are true. 
- Identify the hypothesis and conclusion of a conditional statement. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Use propositional variables and logical connectives to represent statements; and interpret symbolic logical statements in plain language
- Determine whether a conditional statement is true. 
- State the converse and contrapositive of a conditional statement. 


## Resources for Learning

**Text:** We will use the main textbook for the course for the first time in this module. Read the following from *Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction*: 

- [Section 0.2](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_intro-statements.html), up to (but not including) 

**Video:** Just one video to watch -- "The repeated squaring algorithm" (15:25) which is posted in the Module 2 folder. 

You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.



## Exercises

The exercises for this assignment are found at Classkick. Go to http://app.classkick.com and sign in (as a "Portfolio" student). If prompted, use the code `A7Z 3LH`.


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzQ4ODkwOTMxXX0=
-->