---
tags: mth225, dailyprep
---

# Daily Prep 1.2 -- MTH 225

## Overview

Now that you've learned about different number bases, we'll look at how computers do arithmetic in base 2 (binary). In this lesson you will learn how to add and subtract integers written in binary without converting them to base 10. 

## Learning objectives 

**Basic Learning Objectives:** *Before* our class meeting, use the Resources listed below to learn all of the following. You should be reasonably fluent with all of these tasks prior to our meeting; we will field questions on these, but they will not be retaught. 

- Explain when "carrying" will take place when adding binary integers and how this would work. 
- Explain when "borrowing" will take place when subtracting binary integers and how this would work. 
- Add and subtract two binary integers of size 7 bits or less. 


**Advanced Learning Objectives:** *During and after* our class meeting, we will work on learning the following. Fluency with these is not required prior to class. 

- Add two binary integers of size 8 bits or larger. 
- Subtract two binary integers of size 8 bits or larger. 




## Resources for learning

**Video:** Watch these from [the MTH 225 playlist](https://vimeo.com/showcase/8667148) (total running time 15:15): 

<div style="padding:56.25% 0 0 0;position:relative;"><iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/578516501?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" title="Screencast 1.4: Addition in binary"></iframe></div><script src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>

<div style="padding:56.25% 0 0 0;position:relative;"><iframe src="https://player.vimeo.com/video/579560863?badge=0&amp;autopause=0&amp;player_id=0&amp;app_id=58479" frameborder="0" allow="autoplay; fullscreen; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen style="position:absolute;top:0;left:0;width:100%;height:100%;" title="Screencast 1.5: Subtraction in binary"></iframe></div><script src="https://player.vimeo.com/api/player.js"></script>


You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.

## Exercises 

Once you have watched the videos above, go to this form and complete all the non-optional items on it: 

https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSf1CRAlKDphF-bEIJ8NUE7WtKFNqbf345cVdCqxjSMEjbULfA/viewform

There are optional items at the end you can use to send questions or comments. 



## Submission and grading 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is submitted when you submit the Google Form. You should receive an email receipt indicating that the work was submitted successfully.  

**How this is graded:** The pre-class portion of the Daily Prep is graded either 0 points or 1 point, on the basis of completeness and effort. Wrong answers are not penalized. Earning a "1" requires that you: 

- Turn the work in before its deadline; 
- Leave no item blank or skipped, even accidentally; and 
- Give a good-faith effort at a correct answer on every non-optional item. 

More information can be found in the [Specifications for Satisfactory Work in MTH 225](/Cy6P0rGZQzuOM3NwZ3ZuMw) document. 

When you arrive for the class meeting, you'll be put into a group of 2-3 to complete a quiz over this material, which will be graded on a 0/1 scale on the basis of correctness. 