MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH 325 Fall 2024 syllabus.md, before:

# MTH 325: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2, Fall 2024

>**Computer science is not about machines, in the same way that astronomy is not about telescopes. There is an essential unity of mathematics and computer science.**
>
>-- Edsger W. Dijkstra

## About this Syllabus

**Welcome to MTH 325!** I'm Dr. Robert Talbert, the professor for this course. I'm grateful you're here. 

**This syllabus contains all the information you need to navigate the course.** The main document will be kept continuously up to date at this link. When you see blue- or purple-underlined text in the syllabus or any other document, it's a clickable link. For example, [click here for a cat video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aFuUidBR1aQ). A PDF version of the syllabus is available upon request. 

**This document is meant to be read once, then searched as needed.** If you need to find something, the easiest way is to pull up this  document, hit `Control-F` (Windows) or `Command-F` (Mac), and then do a search for the text you're looking for. 

All course materials for MTH 325 are available on GitHub at https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs. The current version is in the folder `MTH325-Fall2024`. Critically important documents will also be on Blackboard in the *Course Documents* folder. 

This course is subject to the GVSU policies listed at http://www.gvsu.edu/coursepolicies/. 


## Key Information

**Class meetings:** Section 03 meets from 11:00-11:50am, in MAK A1161 on Monday and in MAK D2123 on Wednesday and Friday. Section 04 meets from 12:00-12:50pm MWF in MAK D2329. 

**Instructor:** Robert Talbert, Ph.D., Professor of Mathematics. Office: MAK C2513. Email: talbertr@gvsu.edu. Phone: (616)331-8968. **Be sure to read [my availability policy](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH%20325%20Fall%202024%20syllabus.md#other-class-policies) below.**

**Drop-in hours:** TBD

**Webpage:** The course Blackboard site is at http://lms.gvsu.edu. A Course Page, containing a summary of links to important documents and a record of class activities, is [at this link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HAZgvPWV7PeU774Ou-lfoNLWRDSsH9HBjf0ftqW1lus/edit?usp=sharing). 

**Resources:** The **Course Vault** is a wiki containing articles for each of the major concepts of MTH 325 (and MTH 225) and will serve as our primary "textbook": https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs Other resources, such as video content and instructional websites, will be provided as needed. There is no required textbook, but the online text [Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction](https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3.html) is available for free as an optional supplement. 

**Technology requirements:** It's highly recommended to have a laptop and access to a high-speed internet connection for work outside of class. You will need access to a basic handheld calculator for Checkpoint assessments in class. There is no preferred model of device. For in-class technology use, please see the policies in the "How we will use technology" section below. 

## What MTH 325 is about

MTH 325 is the sequel to MTH 225, where you learned some of the basic structures and concepts of mathematics for computer science: Logic, sets, functions, recursion and mathematical induction, and counting. In MTH 325, you'll extend these ideas to learn about four important and related ideas that are essential to computer science: 

- **Mathematical proof**: Introduced in MTH 225, [mathematical proofs](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Logic/Proof) are explanations of why a [proposition](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Logic/Propositions) about an observation is always true. In MTH 225 you learned one approach to mathematical proof, namely [mathematical induction](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Proof/Mathematical+induction). In MTH 325, we expand on induction and introduce several other forms of proof. 
- **Graphs**: A [graph](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Graphs/Graph) is an abstracted data structure used to model a network. They are of central importance to computer science, and in MTH 325 you'll learn how to apply them to real-life networks and determine information about those networks using mathematics. 
- **Trees and search**: A [tree](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Trees/Tree) is a special kind of graph that is encountered frequently in computer science, especially in different approaches to search algorithms and information systems, and like with graphs in MTH 325 you'll learn how to model real-life situations with trees. 
- **Directed graphs and relations**: A **directed graph** (or "digraph") is a graph that has a direction to it, like an airline map or a system of rivers. One special use of digraphs is to model **relations**, which are abstracted forms of relational databases. In MTH 325 you'll learn the theory behind how and why these work. 

After successful completion of MTH 325, you will be able to...

- Compute basic information about graphs, relations, and trees.
- Solve theoretical and applied problems involving applications of basic concepts of graphs, relations, and trees.
- Formulate computational problems in terms of graphs, relations, and trees.
- Construct a logical framework for a proof using mathematical induction, direct proof, proof by contraposition, or proof by contradiction.
- Analyze the structure and validity of a mathematical proof.
- Employ effective problem-solving skills in solving computational problems.
- Explain methods and solutions of computational problems in a clear way to a specified target audience.
- Demonstrate fluency in applying algorithms in the formulation and solutions of mathematical problems.
- Assess your own work in mathematical problem solving and apply feedback to make improvements to your own work.


## What the class will be doing

**During class meetings**, active participation is essential. There will often be a brief (20 minutes or less) lecture over new concepts, followed by 20-30 minutes of activities of different types: problem solving sessions, computer-based lab work, electronic polling with discussion, and more. Your attendance and effort will be needed during every meeting of the class; without attendance and effort, it will be hard to succeed. Some class meetings are set aside for four **Exams** and makeup dates for those exams; see below for more information on that. 

**Before and after class meetings**, the main activity is **Homework**. This is a combination of practice from the topics discussed in class *and* preview activities for the next class. Those preview activities will typically involve experimenting with an idea, and perhaps learning some basic content through video or reading. You are not expected to "teach yourself the material" -- these are just activities to introduce you to a new concept. But, **the lectures in class will assume you have completed the preview activities** so a good-faith effort to complete these each time is essential for your success in the course. 

**Outside of class meetings**, other than Homework, you'll be given occasional **Advanced Homework** sets, typically every other week. These will contain more advanced problems involving applications of basic material learned in class. Since mathematical proof is a critical focus of MTH 325, you will also be completing a **Proof Portfolio** during the semester; problems involving proof will be posted and you will complete a selection of these. 

**Staying engaged** in the course both in and outside of class meetings is crucial for success. You'll occasionally be given activities that promote positive engagement with the course, for example the Startup activities at the beginning of the semester. These and other engagement-focused activities earn **Engagement Credits** (like "experience points" in a game) and you'll be accumulating engagement credits throughout the semester. 


**You can ask a question about anything at any time.** I am typically on campus MWF the entire working day with drop-in hours set aside especially for MTH 325 students from ?? to ??. Each of you is invited to drop in during those times, with any items you want to discuss, no appointment necessary. If you have a question outside those times, you can email those to me (talbertr@gvsu.edu) or set up an appointment at another time by clicking here: https://calendly.com/robert-talbert Then select "MTH 325 student appointment".


## How course grades are determined

There are three main areas that contribute to your course grade: 

- Mastery of basic skills; 
- Application of those basic skills; and 
- Engagement, effort, and participation 

**Mastery of basic skills:** The basic skills of MTH 325 can be broken down into 14 sorts of tasks, which we'll refer to as **Skills**. A list of those 14 Skills is in [Appendix A of this syllabus](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH%20325%20Fall%202024%20syllabus.md#appendix-a-list-of-mth-325-skills). Your ability to perform these tasks is measured by completing **problems** that demonstrate those skills. A sample of these 14 kinds of problems is given in **this document**. Five (5) of these are designated as **Core** skills. Part of your course grade is determined by how well you display mastery of these 14 problems/skills. For each problem/skill, I identify three levels of performance: **Master**, **Proficient**, and **Beginner** level. These problems appear on **Exams** that occur during the semester; four of these are planned and can be found on the course calendar. Each exam is cumulative: Exam 1 will contain problems for Skills 1-4; Exam 2 will contain problems for Skills 1-8 (with the first four problems being new variants of the ones from Exam 1); Exam 3 will have Skills 1-12; and Exam 4 skills 1-14. There will also be occasional short quizzes where you can attempt 1-2 problems of your choice; and the final exam in the course consists of new variants of all 14 problems. 

I will record how well you do on each problem: "**M**" for mastery, "**P**" for proficient, and "**B**" for beginner and record the letter in Blackboard. Detailed rubrics for how those grades are determined can be found in the Standards for Student Work document. Your best attempt on a problem is kept, so if you earn an M on a problem on the first try, you do not need to reattempt it again at any point in the semester; but if you earn a P, you can try again at a subsequent exam or quiz, or on the final. 

**Application of basic skills:** There are two categories to this -


## How to revise or reattempt an assignment

## How we will use technology

## Academic integrity policy

## Other class policies 

**Instructor availability:** Email (talbertr@gvsu.edu) is the best way to reach me with a message outside of class meetings. **All messages needing a response will receive one within one (1) working day** (that is, Monday through Friday). I typically check email **twice during the working day** (early morning and late afternoon) and **do not check email after 5:00pm, before 7:00am, or at any time on weekends**. If you send a message during those times and your message needs a response, you will get one promptly when I am back at work. But in particular, please note that **messages in the evenings and on weekends will not typically get an immediate response**. 


## How to get help

## About the instructor

## Appendices

### Appendix A: List of MTH 325 skills

### Appendix B: Calendar and important dates

Commit message:

First pass at assignments section

MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH 325 Fall 2024 syllabus.md, after:

# MTH 325: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 2, Fall 2024

>**Computer science is not about machines, in the same way that astronomy is not about telescopes. There is an essential unity of mathematics and computer science.**
>
>-- Edsger W. Dijkstra

## About this Syllabus

**Welcome to MTH 325!** I'm Dr. Robert Talbert, the professor for this course. I'm grateful you're here. 

**This syllabus contains all the information you need to navigate the course.** The main document will be kept continuously up to date at this link. When you see blue- or purple-underlined text in the syllabus or any other document, it's a clickable link. For example, [click here for a cat video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=aFuUidBR1aQ). A PDF version of the syllabus is available upon request. 

**This document is meant to be read once, then searched as needed.** If you need to find something, the easiest way is to pull up this  document, hit `Control-F` (Windows) or `Command-F` (Mac), and then do a search for the text you're looking for. 

All course materials for MTH 325 are available on GitHub at https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs. The current version is in the folder `MTH325-Fall2024`. Critically important documents will also be on Blackboard in the *Course Documents* folder. 

This course is subject to the GVSU policies listed at http://www.gvsu.edu/coursepolicies/. 


## Key Information

**Class meetings:** Section 03 meets from 11:00-11:50am, in MAK A1161 on Monday and in MAK D2123 on Wednesday and Friday. Section 04 meets from 12:00-12:50pm MWF in MAK D2329. 

**Instructor:** Robert Talbert, Ph.D., Professor of Mathematics. Office: MAK C2513. Email: talbertr@gvsu.edu. Phone: (616)331-8968. **Be sure to read [my availability policy](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH%20325%20Fall%202024%20syllabus.md#other-class-policies) below.**

**Drop-in hours:** TBD

**Webpage:** The course Blackboard site is at http://lms.gvsu.edu. A Course Page, containing a summary of links to important documents and a record of class activities, is [at this link](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HAZgvPWV7PeU774Ou-lfoNLWRDSsH9HBjf0ftqW1lus/edit?usp=sharing). 

**Resources:** The **Course Vault** is a wiki containing articles for each of the major concepts of MTH 325 (and MTH 225) and will serve as our primary "textbook": https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs Other resources, such as video content and instructional websites, will be provided as needed. There is no required textbook, but the online text [Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction](https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3.html) is available for free as an optional supplement. 

**Technology requirements:** It's highly recommended to have a laptop and access to a high-speed internet connection for work outside of class. You will need access to a basic handheld calculator for Checkpoint assessments in class. There is no preferred model of device. For in-class technology use, please see the policies in the "How we will use technology" section below. 

## What MTH 325 is about

MTH 325 is the sequel to MTH 225, where you learned some of the basic structures and concepts of mathematics for computer science: Logic, sets, functions, recursion and mathematical induction, and counting. In MTH 325, you'll extend these ideas to learn about four important and related ideas that are essential to computer science: 

- **Mathematical proof**: Introduced in MTH 225, [mathematical proofs](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Logic/Proof) are explanations of why a [proposition](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Logic/Propositions) about an observation is always true. In MTH 225 you learned one approach to mathematical proof, namely [mathematical induction](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Proof/Mathematical+induction). In MTH 325, we expand on induction and introduce several other forms of proof. 
- **Graphs**: A [graph](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Graphs/Graph) is an abstracted data structure used to model a network. They are of central importance to computer science, and in MTH 325 you'll learn how to apply them to real-life networks and determine information about those networks using mathematics. 
- **Trees and search**: A [tree](https://publish.obsidian.md/discretecs/Trees/Tree) is a special kind of graph that is encountered frequently in computer science, especially in different approaches to search algorithms and information systems, and like with graphs in MTH 325 you'll learn how to model real-life situations with trees. 
- **Directed graphs and relations**: A **directed graph** (or "digraph") is a graph that has a direction to it, like an airline map or a system of rivers. One special use of digraphs is to model **relations**, which are abstracted forms of relational databases. In MTH 325 you'll learn the theory behind how and why these work. 

After successful completion of MTH 325, you will be able to...

- Compute basic information about graphs, relations, and trees.
- Solve theoretical and applied problems involving applications of basic concepts of graphs, relations, and trees.
- Formulate computational problems in terms of graphs, relations, and trees.
- Construct a logical framework for a proof using mathematical induction, direct proof, proof by contraposition, or proof by contradiction.
- Analyze the structure and validity of a mathematical proof.
- Employ effective problem-solving skills in solving computational problems.
- Explain methods and solutions of computational problems in a clear way to a specified target audience.
- Demonstrate fluency in applying algorithms in the formulation and solutions of mathematical problems.
- Assess your own work in mathematical problem solving and apply feedback to make improvements to your own work.


## What the class will be doing

**During class meetings**, active participation is essential. There will often be a brief (20 minutes or less) lecture over new concepts, followed by 20-30 minutes of activities of different types: problem solving sessions, computer-based lab work, electronic polling with discussion, and more. Your attendance and effort will be needed during every meeting of the class; without attendance and effort, it will be hard to succeed. Some class meetings are set aside for four **Exams** and makeup dates for those exams; see below for more information on that. 

**Before and after class meetings**, the main activity is **Homework**. This is a combination of practice from the topics discussed in class *and* preview activities for the next class. Those preview activities will typically involve experimenting with an idea, and perhaps learning some basic content through video or reading. You are not expected to "teach yourself the material" -- these are just activities to introduce you to a new concept. But, **the lectures in class will assume you have completed the preview activities** so a good-faith effort to complete these each time is essential for your success in the course. 

**Outside of class meetings**, other than Homework, you'll be given occasional **Advanced Homework** sets, typically every other week. These will contain more advanced problems involving applications of basic material learned in class. Since mathematical proof is a critical focus of MTH 325, you will also be completing a **Proof Portfolio** during the semester; problems involving proof will be posted and you will complete a selection of these. 

**Staying engaged** in the course both in and outside of class meetings is crucial for success. You'll occasionally be given activities that promote positive engagement with the course, for example the Startup activities at the beginning of the semester. These and other engagement-focused activities earn **Engagement Credits** (like "experience points" in a game) and you'll be accumulating engagement credits throughout the semester. 


**You can ask a question about anything at any time.** I am typically on campus MWF the entire working day with drop-in hours set aside especially for MTH 325 students from ?? to ??. Each of you is invited to drop in during those times, with any items you want to discuss, no appointment necessary. If you have a question outside those times, you can email those to me (talbertr@gvsu.edu) or set up an appointment at another time by clicking here: https://calendly.com/robert-talbert Then select "MTH 325 student appointment".


## Assignments and how these are graded 

There are three main areas that contribute to your course grade: 

- Mastery of basic skills; 
- Application of those basic skills; and 
- Engagement, effort, and participation 

**Mastery of basic skills:** The basic skills of MTH 325 can be broken down into 14 sorts of tasks, which we'll refer to as **Skills**. A list of those 14 Skills is in [Appendix A of this syllabus](https://github.com/RobertTalbert/discretecs/blob/master/MTH325-Fall2024/course-docs/MTH%20325%20Fall%202024%20syllabus.md#appendix-a-list-of-mth-325-skills). Your ability to perform these tasks is measured by completing **problems** that demonstrate those skills. A sample of these 14 kinds of problems is given in **this document**. Five (5) of these are designated as **Core** skills. Part of your course grade is determined by how well you display mastery of these 14 problems/skills. For each problem/skill, I identify three levels of performance: **Master**, **Proficient**, and **Beginner** level. These problems appear on **Exams** that occur during the semester; four of these are planned and can be found on the course calendar. Each exam is cumulative: Exam 1 will contain problems for Skills 1-4; Exam 2 will contain problems for Skills 1-8 (with the first four problems being new variants of the ones from Exam 1); Exam 3 will have Skills 1-12; and Exam 4 skills 1-14. There will also be occasional short quizzes where you can attempt 1-2 problems of your choice; and the final exam in the course consists of new variants of all 14 problems. 

I will record how well you do on each problem: "**M**" for mastery, "**P**" for proficient, and "**B**" for beginner and record the letter in Blackboard. Detailed rubrics for how those grades are determined can be found in the Standards for Student Work document. Your best attempt on a problem is kept, so if you earn an M on a problem on the first try, you do not need to reattempt it again at any point in the semester; but if you earn a P, you can try again at a subsequent exam or quiz, or on the final. 

**Application of basic skills:** The basic skills can be applied in two different ways: *real world applications* and *mathematical proofs*. 

Real-world applications appear on **Advanced Homework** sets which you'll receive roughly every other week. These include some basic and extended practice problems, and harder problems that involve applications. Each Advanced Homework is graded as a whole using a rubric found in the Standards for Student Work document, and in Blackboard we record either **Success** if the work meets the standards, or **Retry** if it does not. 

We will maintain a running list of **proof problems**, added to on a regular basis as we learn more material, from which you can select a few to demonstrate skill with writing proofs. You'll take the ones you select, solve them, give them a nice writeup, and submit them on Blackboard for grading. Like Advanced Homework, proof problems are graded using a rubric found in the Standards for Student Work document, and in Blackboard we record either **Success** if the work meets the standards, or **Retry** if it does not. 

The process of revising or resubmitting Advanced Homework or proof problems is given in detail below, in "How to revise or reattempt an assignment". 

**Engagement, effort, and participation:** There are several ways to demonstrate engagement with the class. 

- The foremost is **Homework**, which as described above is a brief assignment given after a class meeting that contains a review of the lesson and a preview of the next lesson. *Completing Homework regularly is critically important for success in MTH 325*. 
- Other activities will appear in the class that will let you earn **engagement credits**. Attending a class meeting earns one engagement credit. Other activities will have different engagement credit values. By completing these activities, you'll accumulate engagement credits through the semester. 


## How course grades are determined 

Your basic course grade in the class -- A, B, C, D, or F without plus/minus modifiers -- is earned by meeting 

## How to revise or reattempt an assignment

## How we will use technology

## Academic integrity policy

## Other class policies 

**Instructor availability:** Email (talbertr@gvsu.edu) is the best way to reach me with a message outside of class meetings. **All messages needing a response will receive one within one (1) working day** (that is, Monday through Friday). I typically check email **twice during the working day** (early morning and late afternoon) and **do not check email after 5:00pm, before 7:00am, or at any time on weekends**. If you send a message during those times and your message needs a response, you will get one promptly when I am back at work. But in particular, please note that **messages in the evenings and on weekends will not typically get an immediate response**. 


## How to get help

## About the instructor

## Appendices

### Appendix A: List of MTH 325 skills

### Appendix B: Calendar and important dates
