## Module 4 video scripts

## 4.1 

Welcome to Module 4! So far in this series of videos, we've learned about how computers represent and work with integers, about the logic behind how those and other computer operations work, and in Module 3 we learned about sets and functions which are the prototypes for computer data structures and programs. All of that materiall lays the groundwork for what the next two moodules are about -- thinking mathematically about underlying problems that show up throughout computer science. 

One of the major categories of those kinds of problems is *counting*. I don't mean simple counting, like you learned when you were a toddler. We mean counting complex arrangements of things. For example: How many 16-bit strings are there that have exactly 10 "1" digits? Or, if your computer password has to be a 12-character string that must contain a number, a capital letter, and a special character, how many passwords are possible? Or, if you are trying to sort a long list of numbers or words, how many steps are needed? 

The particular area of mathematics that deals with counting complex arrangements of things is called **Combinatorics**. 
Combinatorics is central to computer science for many reasons. Maybe the biggest reason is that before we write code in a computer program, we first of all have to understand the underlying algorithm that we are trying to implement in that code. And part of that understanding resides in how many steps or computations are needed. For example, going back to sorting, if we're given a long list of numbers or words to sort, then there are some ways of sorting them that are more efficient than others, because although different methods may give the same results, some take less time than others and scale up better for longer lists than shorter ones. To be able to understand the efficiency of algorithms, we need to be able to count the steps. 

This module is an introduction to the basics of combinatorics, and I hope that as we work through the ideas here you will not only see their usefulness in computer science, but also that you'll be impressed by how cool and beautiful some of these methods for quickly counting complex arrangements are. 

---

Let's begin with a basic problem that we literally encounter every day: Choosing clothes to wear. In my room at home, my shirts are put in a few different places. The long-sleeve dress shirts are on a rack in my closet. Short-sleeve dress shirts are on another rack in the closet. T-Shirts are in a drawer. These are three separate locations for my shirts. Now let's suppose I'm getting ready for work and I need to pick a shirt. If I have 6 long-sleeve shirts and 10 short-sleeve dress shirts. If those are the only shirts I have, then how many possible ways can I pick a shirt? 

Visualize my shirt arrangements like this, where the shirts live in separate bins. My room doesn't actually look like this, but the drawing here is an abstraction that represents the bins. Importantly: these bins don't overlap. there is no such thing as a shirt that is long-sleeve and short-sleeve at the same time. Well, if I pick one shirt, then there are 6 possible choices from the long-sleeve bin. But I also have 10 possible choices from the short-sleeve bin. So in all, because it's one choice and none of these bins overlap, that's 16 possible shirt choices. That's all my shirts, each one lives in one of these bins, and I am just picking one shirt. 

What we've just illustrated is something called the *Additive Principle of counting*. The Additive Principle says that if an event A can occur in "m" ways and another event B can occur in "n" ways, and those events are disjoint, then the event "A or B" can occur in m+n ways. Let's unpack the language here. First of all an "event" refers to the *outcome* of an action. So in our example "choosing a shirt" is an action, with two possible *events* as outcomes --- event "A" is I picked a long sleeve shirt and event "B" is that I picked a short sleeve shirt. And when we say two events are "disjoint" we mean the same thing as when we say two *sets* are disjoint: They have no intersection, no common elements. Two disjoint events are events that can't both happen at the same time, like picking a shirt that is both long-sleeve and short-sleeve. So in our case, I am making a single choice, that has two disjoint outcomes --- or you can think of it as I am making a single choice from among two disjoint sets or bins. The Additive Principle just says that in these conditions, the total number of choices is just the sum of the possible outcomes over each bin. 

Here's another example: I also have  20 t-shirts in a drawer in my room. Six of those are black, 4 are green, 8 are blue, and 2 are white. None of them are multi-colored. If I don't want to pick a dress shirt (long or short sleeve) today but a t-shirt instead, how many ways are there to pick either a black or a blue t-shirt? Pause the video for a second and work this out. 

The Additive Principle applies here because we are making a single choice that has multiple *disjoint* outcomes. Again I don't actually keep the t-shirts in separate drawers, but you can think of it as separating the different colors into different bins and making one choice from among these bins. And again, note that none of the shirts are multi-colored so the bins are disjoint. The number of ways to pick a black shirt is 6, and the number of ways to pick a blue shirt is 8. So the Additive Principle would say that the total number of ways to pick either black or blue, is 8+6 or 14. 

Now let's make this a little more complicated. Suppose that not only my t-shirts but also my long-sleeve and short-sleeve shirts have colors. Remember there were 16 dress shirts in all. Let's say that 8 of those are white, 5 are pink, and 3 are blue. If I were going to pick a shirt, and it can be from any of the shirts I own --- long-  and short-sleeve, or t-shirt --- then how many ways are there to pick a shirt that is either a t-shirt or is colored blue? 

You might answer by saying there are 20 t-shirts; and for blue shirts, there are 3 blue dress shirts and 8 blue t-shirts for a total of 11. So the Additive Principle would say there are 20+11 = 31 ways to pick a shirt that's either t-shirt or blue. But this is incorrect. There are definitely 20 t-shirts and so 20 ways to pick one. And there are definitely 11 blue shirts and so 11 ways to pick one of those. But there are 8 shirts that are both blue and a t-shirt. So when counting the number of shirts to pick, those get counted twice and so the number 31 is too big. To correct it, I need to subtract off the number of shirts that are both blue and t-shirts because again I counted those twice when I added, so subtracting that number off will result in counting those shirts only once. So the true number is 20, plus 11, *minus 8* for a total of 23 ways to pick a shirt that's either blue or a t-shirt. 

The reason that the Additive Principle didn't apply here directly is because the bins aren't disjoint. The two "events" or outcomes of my choice --- either a t-shirt or a blue-shirt --- can overlap because there are some shirts that are both. So instead of the Additive Principle, we are using a simple version of what's called the *Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion* or PIE. It's phrased in terms of sets and cardinality: The cardinality of a finite set A union with another finite set B, is the cardinality of A plus the cardinality of B minus the cardinality of the intersection. This is just what we saw in the example. "A" was the set of t-shirts and "B" was the set of blue shirts. And A union B is the set of shirts that are either t-shirts or blue. That number, the cardinality, was the number of tshirts, plus the number of blue shirts, minus the number of blue t-shirts because if we just added, then that intersection is counted twice. So subtracting off one intersection corrects the count. 

Notice that if A and B do happen to be disjoint, like in our initial example then the formula here in the PIE gives an empty intersection, which has cardinality zero and that gets us back to the basic Additive Principle. 

We'll be returning to the Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion later in this module to deal with complexities that come when you have three or more sets of objects that you're choosing from, where there are two-way intersections and three-way intersections at work. 

So in this video you learned about the important field of combinatorics and why it matters to computer science, the Additive Principle which tells you how to count the number of ways to make a single choice from a disjoint collection of bins, and the basic Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion which counts the number of ways to do this if you have two bins that aren't disjoint. Next up is a counting principle that goes with these, for how to count multiple choices. 



## 4.2

In the last video we learned about the Additive Principle of counting and the basic Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion. These are guidelines for how to count the number of outcomes of in this case a single choice, made from a collection of sets. Here's a different counting problem that we often encounter, where this principle does NOT apply. 

Go back to choosing clothes to get ready for work. Obviously I don't *just* wear a shirt to work but I also have to choose a pair of pants, and a pair of shoes to wear among other things. Let's suppose I definitely want to wear a long sleeve dress shirt today, and I don't care what color it is -- last time I said I have six of those in my closet. I also need to choose a pair of pants to wear, and I have 5 pairs. And finally I need to choose shoes, and I have three pairs from which to choose. (This of course is ignoring other choices I have to make like socks, underwear, belts, and so on). How many possible outfits can I pick, given that range of choices? 

Before we answer that, notice that the additive principle does NOT apply this time because I am not making *one* choice from a bunch of disjoint bins, but a *sequence* of *three* choices, each of which has its own number of possible outcomes. I am not just picking a single outfit from a collection of outfits. I am picking a shirt, *and then* picking pants, *and then* picking shoes. It's a *sequence of choices*. So this is not the kind of situation where the Additive Principle or the Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion apply. 

Let's visualize my possible choices here. If I pick the shirt first, I have six choices. Now if I pick the pants, I have five choices *for each* of the shirt choices I made. So far that gets me up to 30 possible outfits -- 6 times 5 because for each shirt, I can choose 5 pairs of pants. Finally I choose shoes, and there are three choices of shoes for each of the 30 outfits-in-progress I have already picked. So the total number of outfits should be 30*3 or 90. It's the product of 6, 5, and 3. 

What this tree structure shows you is that given a situation where we are making a sequence of choices, not just a single choice, and each choice has a certain number of outcomes, we get the total number of outcomes by multiplying all the individual number of outcomes together. This is formally expressed in the *Multiplicative Principle* which states that if an event "A" can occur in "m" ways, and for each possible outcome of A there is another event B that can occur in "n" ways, then the event "A and B" can occur in m*n ways. Again, perhaps more simply put, if you are making a *sequence of choices* then the total number of outcomes of that sequence of choices, is the product of the number of outcomes of each individual choice. 

Here's an example that doesn't have to do with clothes. We mentioned passwords earlier, and counting the number of passwords in a computer system is really important because we want to make sure the space of passwords available to users is large enough that we don't run out, and also large enough that it would be impractical for a hacker to get someone's password by brute force --- that is, just running through all possible passwords until something works. Let's say that a university has these rules for passwords: They have to be 12 characters long exactly, and the characters have to be either uppercase letters A-Z, lowercase letters a-z, digits 0-9, or chosen from a collection of 14 non-alphanumeric characters. Under those rules, how many passwords are possible? 

This will use the Multiplicative Principle because choosing a password involves making a sequence of 12 choices --- one choice for each of the characters in the password. We can visualize this by starting with an empty password like this. In each box, I have to make a choice. Since this is a sequence of choices each of which has a certain number of ways of happening, in the end the total number of passwords is the product of the number of ways to fill each blank. OK, so how many ways are there to fill each blank? Well, each blank is filled by picking one thing from this collection and notice *this* is a sub-problem that uses the Additive Principle --- it's the same basic problem as picking a shirt from the different racks in m closet. There are 26 ways to choose a capital letter, 26 ways to choose a lower-case letter, 10 ways to pick a digit, and 14 ways to choose a non-alphanumeric character --- all of these are disjoint, so that's a total of 76 ways to fill each blank. 

Back to the main problem, we've now determined there are 76 ways to make each choice of character, and 12 characters. So the total number of passwords is 76, times 76, times 76.... 12 times, which is 76 to the 12th power. This is an enormous number that's on the order of 10 to the 22.  To put that number in perspective, it's estimate that the number of grains of sand on planet earth is around 10^21, so there are roughly 10 times as many passwords available in this system as there are grains of sand. If a hacker were to try to find a password in this system by brute force by trying one at a time at a rate of 10000 per second, this would take 10^17 seconds, which is roughly equal to the age of the known universe. So this university is safe in terms of passwords.

What if you chose a password in this system but weren't allowed to duplicate any of the characters? That would keep people from choosing passwords like these. Pause the video and see if you can modify the solution to the previous example to solve this problem. 

OK, let's count. There are still 12 blanks to fill, and filling them is a sequence of choices. There are still 76 ways to pick the character in the first blank. But if we can't duplicate, then there are only 75 ways to make the second choice, because the first character we picked is no longer available. then there are only 74 choices for the third blank, 73 for the fourth, and so on until we have 65 choices for the twelfth and final blank. Again this is a sequence of choices and we see the number of possible outcomes for each choice. So the total number of passwords now is the product of all these, which is still a huge number but not as huge as it was before. Which makes sense because we are counting a smaller space of outcomes now. 

So in this video we learned a new counting technique, the Multiplicative Principle, which shows us how to count arrangements when the arrangements are the outcome of a sequence of choices each of which has a certain number of outcomes. We also saw the Additive Principle make an appearance to help determine the number of outcomes of some of those choices, which shows that these principles don't always stand alone but have to work together, and it's our job as intelligent humans to know what tool to use in which situations. Next up is a mini-series of videos where we're going to learn a central tool for counting, and in the process learn some more techniques for counting these complex arrangements. See you there! 

## 4.7

- Number of n-bit strings with weight k = number of k-element subsets of an n-element set 
- Not just happens to be equal but are equal because on some deeper level they are the same thing
- We are taking a collection of n objects and selecting k things out of it
- We will now call this number something: The **binomial coefficient** $\binom{n}{k}$ pronounced "n choose k" because that's what you're doing. 
  - It's not a fraction, it's like a little matrix with the size of the collection on top and the size of the set you're selecting on the bottom. 
  - It replaces the notation |B(n,k)| from earlier videos. 
- Examples: 
  - 5 choose 3 is 10 
  - Special cases are easy: 5 choose 0 is 1, in fact anything choose 0 is 1
  - 5 choose 5 is 1, in fact anything choose itself is 1 
- Fundamental recurrence relation

In this miniseries of videos, you've learned a lot about counting complex arrangements. You've learned some techniques and tricks for counting as well as some pitfalls to avoid when solving a problem about counting. There's one finding from what we've seen that really stands out. 

That's the fact that the number of n-bit strings with weight k, is the same as the number of k-element subsets of an n-element set. The fact that these two numbers work out to be the same is a little mysterious because when you look at the objects that are being counted, they don't look like each other. But the numbers are the same, not by coincidence but because on some deep level, they are just two ways of expressing the same thing. We built a bijection between the two sets to express this. What that bijection expresses is that a string of bits with a number of 1 bits in it, is a way of voting for what elements from a set to include in a subset. 

In other words, these processes -- finding n-bit strings of a given weight and finding subsets of an n-element set of a given size -- are really doing the same thing. They are starting with a collection of distinct objects and then selecting items out of that collection. The number of ways to take a collection of n distinct objects and select k items from that collection is really what we have been computing all this time. 

This idea of selecting k elements from a collection of n elements is such an important type of counting problem that we are going to give it a special name. The binomial coefficient -- notated like this, and pronounced "n choose k" -- is the number of ways to select k elements from a collection of n distinct elements. This is the same thing as the number of k-element subsets of an n-element set; which is also the same as the number of n-bit strings with weight k. 

Please note, this notation is NOT a fraction. It is just notation and there is no algebra manipulation we can do with it. 

For example: 5 choose 3 is 10. We know this because we computed it earlier as the number of 5-bit strings with weight 3. We also know from previous work that there are special cases: 5 choose 0 is 1 because there is only one 5-bit string with weight 0; and there's only one way to select a 0-element subset from a 5-element set. This is true for any value of n --- n choose 0 is 1. Likewise n choose n is 1 because there's only one n-bit string with weight n (the bitstring that's all 1's) and only one way to choose a subset of n elements from an n-element set (which is to choose the entire set itself). 

We also know that there's a recurrence relation that governs these arrangements. We learned that for any n and k, the number of n-bit strings with weight k is equal to the number of n-1 bit strings of weight k, plus the number of n-1 bit strings with weight k-1. Phrased using the binomial coefficient, this would say that n choose k equals n-1 choose k plus n-1 choose k-1. 

We can use these initial conditions and the recurrence relation to compute n choose k using a visual trick. Look at this triangle of binomial coefficients. We know 0 choose 0 is 1 because any natural number choose 0 is 1. We also know 1 choose 0 is 1 and 1 choose 1 is 1. In fact all these numbers along the sides of the triangle are equal to 1. Now look at the highest binomial coefficient we haven't done yet, 2 choose 1. We know this is equal to 1 choose 1 plus 1 choose 0 so that's 2. Now 3 choose 1 is 2 choose 1 plus 2 choose 0, wich is 2+1 or 3. Likewise 3 choose 2 is the sum of 2 choose 2 and 2 choose 1 which is 3. So in this triangle, the recurrence relation that governs how the binomial coefficient works will let us find any binomial coefficient in the middle here as the sum of the two just above it. This triangle is called Pascal's Triangle after the great mathematician Blaise Pascal. 

For example, look at 5 choose 3 again. This is equal to 4 choose 3 plus 4 choose 2. In Pascal's Triangle 4 choose 3 is the sum of the two numbers above it, which is 4; and 4 choose 2 is the sum of the two numbers just above it, which is 6. So 5 choose 3 is 6 + 4 or 10, which verifies what we already know. 

In this video, we introduced the binomial coefficient which is a number that gives the solution to two different counting problems -- the number of n-bit strings with weight k and the number of k-element subsets of an n-element set. And we stated two initial conditions for the binomial coefficient and the underlying recurrence relation for the binomial coefficient. And we learned about Pascal's triangle which is a way to get the value of the binomial coefficient using a visual pattern. In the next video, we'll look more closely at a more general problem of how many ways there are to select items out of a collection when the ordering of the selection makes a difference. 


## 4.8

We've just added the binomial coefficient to our list of tools for solving complex counting problems. The binomial coefficient n choose k counts the number of ways to select a group of k things from a larger collection of n things. An important interpretation of this is it's the number of ways to choose a k-element subset of an n-element set. One important thing to remember about sets in general is that the ordering of the elements in a set doesn't matter. But what if we were making a selection from a larger group and the ordering did matter? That's what this video is about. 

Let's start with a simpler situation. Suppose I'm playing a game where I have some letter tiles and I need to rearrange them to spell out as many words as I can. Suppose that I have seven of these tiles and they are all different letters. How many arrangements are there? That is, how many ways can I reorder this set of tiles? 

We can solve this pretty easily with the Multiplicative Principle. Imagine that I am going to physically reorder those tiles on an empty rack with six positions. Filling the empty rack is a sequence of choices, so let's count the choices at each stage. There are 7 ways to fill in the first slot, 6 for the second, then 5, then 4, then 3, then 2, then 1. So the number of rearrangements is the product of all these, which in this case is 5040. YOu might remember that this product of 7 times 6 times 5 and so forth times 2 times 1 is called 7 factorial. 

More generally if I had "n" tiles and they were all different letters, then the number of rearrangements would be n factorial -- n times n-1 times n-2 times... and so on down to 3 times 2 times 1. Back when we defined the factorial function, we said that it counts the number of arrangements possible of a list of n distinct or different objects. 

Now let's think about the problem we started this video with, counting the number of ways to select a group of objects from a larger group of objects in such a way that the ordering actually is taken into account. Again if the ordering were *not* taken into account, we'd just use the binomial coefficient because that's just forming a subset from a larger set. 

Here's an example of the kind of problem we're interested in. Suppose I have a class of 12 students and from that group, I need to pick 3 students to be the leadership team of the math club. One student will be the president, another the vice-president, and the other the treasurer. How many ways are there to make this selection? It's not 12 choose 3 because that treats the choice of Alice, bob, chuck the same as the choice of bob, chuck, alice and that's not it. So let's think about this. Imagine the leadership team choices as three spots to fill (because it *is* three spots to fill). Filling those spots is a sequence of choices. There are 12 ways to fill the first spot. Then 11 ways to fill the second, then 10 to fill the last one. So it's 12 * 11 * 10 or 1320 by the Multiplicative Principle. 

We could stop there, and just say that this problem of selecting an *ordered* list of objects from a larger group always works out like this, using the Multiplicative Principle, and that wouldn't be wrong. But let's look a little further. This number 12 * 11 * 10 is not a factorial but it's a piece of a factorial. In fact if you think about it, it's 12! with 9! divided off. So the number of ways to make this selection is 12!/9!. 

This looks a little like the closed formula for the binomial coefficient. 12 choose 3 according to that formula would be 12! over not just 9! but 9! times 3!. So this ordered version of the binomial coefficient is missing the 3! on the bottom. But this makes sense, because we are taking the ordering into account now. The binomial coefficient, when we were defining it, divided off the 3! because choosing items with ordering counted each arrangement as different selections. That was not what we wanted when making subsets, so we divided off that 3! to correct the count. But this *is* what we want when we are making ordered selections, so we don't divide it off. 

In general, when you make a selection of k elements from a larger group of n elements and do so in a way that takes the order of the choice into account, this is called a *k-permutation* and this is denoted P(n,k). We just learned that P(n,k) is always equal to n!/(n-k)! For example we saw P(12,3) is 12! over 9!. This is not by magic but because this is just the Mutliplicative Principle at work. 

Here's another example. Suppose I have a set A with 4 elements and a set B with 10 elements. How many functions are possible from A to B, and how many of those are injective? 

To answer the first question, let's make a sequence of choices of where to send each element of A. Although the ordering doesn't matter in a set, let's pretend the set is {1,2,3,4} and go one at a time. Well, with no restriction on the function, there are 10 choices for where to map 1, then 10 for where to map 2, 10 for 3, and 10 for 4. So there are four blanks with 10 choices each so there are 10^4 or 10000 possible functions. That's not a k-permutation or a rearrangement but just the basic multiplicative principle. However if we require injective, then it's got to be less than 10000. Let's count: there are 10 choices for the output of 1, but now only 9 choices for the output of 2, 8 for 3, and 7 for 4. This is 10*9*8*7 which is 5040. You may not even realize it, but this is P(10,4) --- which makes sense in hindsight, because we're basically looking at the codomain of our function and making a selection of 4 things out of it, and putting the selection in order of which point in the domain maps to it. But I think it's actually clearer to *not* view this as a 4-permutation but just count things and use the Multiplicative principle. 

In this video we added two tools to our collection for counting: The factorial function for counting arrangements of items in a set, and the k-permutation for counting the number of *ordered* selections of k items from a group of n items. Next up, we introduce a new but not entirely unrelated counting problem of distributing items to different people. 

## 4.9

We've looked a lot at counting problems that deal with selections and rearrangements. Here's a new kind of problem that on the surface looks very different from these. 

I have three children and their initials are L, P, and H. Lets suppose I want to give them some money in the form of $20 bills. I happen to have $200, in 10 $20 bills.  But there's no restriction on how I give them away.  I could for example give 3 bills to H, 3 to L, and 4 to P. Or, I could give 5 to L, 3 to P, and 2 to H. Or I could give all 10 of them to H. The only rules here are that I can't split up the bills into smaller amounts, and I have to give away all of them. Also, all the bills are identical. So, how many ways are there to do this? 

Let's start with some WRONG answers to this question. 

One wrong answer is 3^10. This is the answer you would get if you approached the problem like picking a license plate --- where, for each of the 10 bills, you pick a kid to give it to. That would be a sequence of 10 choices with 3 outcomes each, so 3^10. This sounds reasonable, but it's wrong, because it overcounts. For example, if I wanted to give 5 bills to P, then under this method of selection, giving P the first five bills would be counted as a different way of distributing the money than if I instead gave her the first three and then the last 2. But they aren't different, because P ends up with 5 bills either way. So 3^10 counts many of the same distributions multiple times, resulting in an overcount. 

Another wrong answer is 10^3. This would be the answer if you approach it as a sequence of 3 choices with 10 outcomes each --- pick a $20 bill for each kid. But this isn't right either because it doesn't account for the fact that a kid will get more than one $20 bill. 

Another wrong answer is 10 choose 3. This one feels better but it's still wrong. 10 choose 3 is the number of ways to select 3 objects from a group of 10 and we're not doing that. We're not picking three $20 bills out of the collection, we are giving away all 10 in different ways. 

Yet another wrong answer is P(10,3), which is 10 * 9 * 8. This has the same problem as 10^3 --- it assumes we're going down the line one kid to the next and picking a single $20 bill to give to each kid, but that's not right because the kids could potentially get more than one bill. 

So this is a new kind of situation. We are not rearranging anything, we are not selecting anything --- we are *distributing* things. We are taking 10 identical objects ($20 bills) and distributing them in different ways to 3 different places (my kids' wallets). Before we can count the number of ways to do this, we need to have a way of even conceptualizing how this works.

Like all counting problems, it helps to visualize the actual process that we are modeling before we do any math with it. Let's suppose I decided to split up the money by giving 5 bills to L, 4 to P, and 1 to H. How would this actually be done? I would go find L in my house and count out the 5 bills and give them to her. Then switch -- go find P, and count out 4 bills to her. Then switch -- go find H, and give him the remaining bill. I can turn this way of distributing the money into a little diagram like this: For L, put five stars, one for each bill I give out. Then to denote the switch from one kid to another, draw a vertical bar. Now for P, put 4 stars to represent the 4 bills she gets. Then put another bar for the switchover to the remaining kid. Then put one star down for the one bill I am giving H. 

This "Stars and bars" diagram is shorthand for the distribution of money. Every distribution has its own diagram. For example if I wanted to give 2 bills to L, 4 to P, and 4 to H, the diagram would look like this. If I wanted to give L 8 bills, P nothing, and H the remaining two, the diagram would look like 8 stars, followed by a bar, followed by another bar --- there's no star here because there was no bill given -- followed by 2 stars. Likewise if you're given a diagram like this, you can tell what distribution of money was meant. This diagram for example means give 1 bill to L, 1 to P, and the remaining 8 to H. 

So every distribution of money has a unique diagram that represents it, and vice versa, every diagram gives you a unique distribution. That means there is a bijection between the set of all distributions of 10 bills to 3 kids, and the set of all these stars and bars diagrams with 10 stars and 2 bars. So if I count one set, I have counted the other. 

But it's actually really easy to count the second set here of stars and bars diagrams if you look at it right. Each of these diagrams can be turned into a string of bits by replacing each star with a 0 and each bar with a 1. This replacement --- stars to 0s and bars to 1s --- is yet another bijection. In our example it turns a stars and bars diagram into a string of bits, and not just any string, but a string with 12 bits in it --- because there are always 10 stars and 2 bars in any distribution of money --- and exactly 2 "1" bits. And we have seen this problem before: The set of all 12-bit strings with weight 2, is counted by the binomial coefficient 12 choose 2. 

Therefore the number of stars and bars diagrams in our example is 12 choose 2 and therefore the number of ways to distribute 10 $20 bills to three kids is also 12 choose 2, or 66. 

So these distribution kinds of problems don't involve any new mathematical formulas. They do require us to think creatively about turning one kind of problem into another --- a problem about distribution becomes a problem about counting bitstrings with a given length and weight. This method is referred to as the stars and bars method --- but again it's not really a "method" because no new math is introduced here. The method, if there is one, is in realizing the application of the stars and bars diagrams to problems involving distribution. 

Here's a variation on this problem. Suppose I want to give away my ten $20 bills so that all of them are given away, but also so that each kid gets at least one of the bills. How many ways are there to do *that*? It should be less than 66, because the previous example includes all of these new ways of distributing. But how many ways exactly are there? 

Again it's actually pretty simple if you start by visualizing the actual process we are trying to model. If I were actually giving out money this way, I'd first give out one bill to each kid, to make sure they had one. Well, now I have to distribute the rest --- and that's a problem similar to the previous one, except now I only have 7 bills to distribute among three kids since I already gave away one to each kid. So how many ways are there to give out 7 bills to three kids? The stars and bars diagram for any such distribution would have 7 stars in it, one for each of the bills, and two bars again because with 3 kids there would be two points where I switch from one kid to the other. So the total number of distributions is 9 choose 2, which is 36. 

We can check this result by using a computer to actually list all the distributions of money here and see if we're right. This code here creates a list of triples, with L in the first coordinate, P in the second, and H in the third. I've set it up so that each of the three variables runs from 0 through 10. If I just run this, it produces all possible triples with entries 0 through 10, in other words a Cartesian product. If I want the coordinates here to represent the number of bills each kid gets, some of these triples are impossible, for example 8, 6, 5 is impossible because I only have 10 bills to give away. So I'm going to place a filter at the end of this list which will keep only those triples that add up to 10. So here are all the possible money distributions I can make, and as you can see the length of that list is 66 which is what our stars and bars method said it should be. In the modified example where each kid had to get at least one bill, I can create that list just by specifying the variables have to start at 1. Here's that list, and as you can see the length is 36, which is what we said it should be. 

So this video introduced a new kind of counting problem, where we are distributing a collection of identical items to a number of recipients. That problem is solved using a visual trick called a stars and bars diagram, and changing those diagrams into bit strings of a certain weight (equal to the number of bars used) allows us to solve these problems using the binomial coefficient. Thanks for watching. 


## 4.10 

- Counting problems can be very tricky because it's not always clear exactly what approach you should take -- might be a combination of approaches. And it's tempting to just start applying formulas before you truly understand the problem. Here are some guidelines -- not a foolproof algorithm but guidelines. 
- First use your human brain to study and analyze the problem --- play with examples --- what am I trying to do? 
- Flowchart
  - Making a single selection from a bunch of sets? 
    - Are they disjoint or not?
  - Making a sequence of selections with known outcomes for each? 
  - Selecting a group from a collection? 
    - Does order matter? 
  - Rearranging a list of objects? 
    - Are they all identical? 
  - Distributing identical items to different locations? 
- And realize that the right method may not be any single one of these, but a combo 
- Example: Class of 12 students and I want to split them up into 4 groups of 3. How many different ways to do that? 
  - Closest match in the flowchart is selecting a group from a collection, but it's not a perfect match --- 12 choose 3 is just picking one group. But maybe that helps. Think about the actual process that would take place -- I'd pick the first group, then the second, then the third, then the fourth. So it's a sequence of choices -- multiplicative principle. And each choice has outcomes, how many? 
  - First choice is picking the first group -- 12 choose 3. 
  - Second choice is picking the second group -- 9 choose 3
  - Then 6 choose 3
  - Then finally 3 choose 3. 
  - So first glance --- it's the product of these three binomial coefficients. 
  - But there's one subtle point: We have overcounted because this picks "group 1", then "group 2", etc. But if I put ABC in group 1 and DEF in group 2, that's the same, for me as putting DEF in group 1 and ABC in group 2. So I have overcounted because I am treating the ordering of the groups themselves as being different. That's not the case so I have to divide off by the number of ways to rearrange those groups, which is 4!. 
  - Guidelines: 
    - Use your human brain first
    - Play with examples until you understand the process
    - The flowchart helps, but most counting problems are a combo
    - Beware of overcounting 

We've come to the final video in this module on combinatorics. We've seen a lot of different ways to formulate and solve counting problems and introduced several tools for solving them. As you're surely aware by now, these problems can be very tricky. Solutions that seem perfectly logical might contain hidden assumptions or incorrect interpretations that might lead to a solution that overcounts, or undercounts, or just isn't even the correct approach at all. In this video, we're not going to introduce any new concepts or tools but instead just review some problem-solving concepts that will help you stay on the right track when working a combinatorics problem, or any other kind of problem. 

The first concept to keep in mind is **try to understand the problem first before using math**. Don't begin by applying formulas. Instead, begin by using your human brain to comprehend what exactly is being done. What are the data? What are the conditions on the problem? What are we counting? A powerful way to understand a problem is to **look at it in different ways**. Can you draw a picture or a diagram? Can you physically act out the situation to understand how the process you are counting actually unfolds? 

The second concept is to **compare the problem you have to problems you have seen before**. For example, is the situation you are counting like the license plate problem? Or is it a distribution style of problem that would involve stars and bars? If so, then how is it like those? Can you explain the way that the problem you have relates to a problem you have seen before? 

The third concept is related to the second one: **Generate lots of examples and data, and try to solve the problem in a specific related special case.** As we've seen many times already, specific examples do not belong in a general solution to a problem, but it's often nearly impossible to understand a new problem without doing reconnaissance work first by looking at specific examples, or simplified versions of the problem. If you can work out the problem in special cases, look at all those special cases and see what they have in common. You can also use a computer at times to actually enumerate and count the situation you are counting, by having the computer generate a lot of examples for you very quickly, and then you can use your human brain to reality check your own solution. 

Fourth and finally, to repeat something just said, **reality check your solution**. Does the answer make sense? For example, look at the problem of counting the number of 8-bit strings that either begin with a "10" or end in a "11". If you come up with an answer of 512, you should reality check this --- it's not even possible, because the number of 8-bit strings without any restrictions at all is 2^8 which is 256. The bit strings being counted are a subset of all 8-bit strings so the answer to your problem cannot possibly be larger than 256. 



