MTH225-Winter2024/assignments/checkpoints/Checkpoint 7 guide.md, before:

# Checkpoint 7 guide 

## C1

*"If it is raining outside, then I will bring an umbrella."*

1. It is raining outside
2. I will bring an umbrella
3. If I bring an umbrella, then it is raining outside. 
4. If I don't bring an umbrella, then it is not raining outside. 
5. If it is not rainig outside, then I will not bring an umbrella. 
6. It is raining outside but I don't bring an umbrella. 

### Common mistakes

These are the same common mistakes that have appeared on past Checkpoints, so please refer to past Checkpoint guides for details. **If you are making these common mistakes repeatedly, please speak with me (Talbert) about it.**

- **Writing the converse by simply switching the locations in the sentence without actually changing the hypothesis or conclusion**: "I will bring an umbrella if it is raining outside." Again, this is the same statement as the original. 
- **Not using the correct form of the negation:** It's not an if-then statement. 

## C2

For every integer $n \geq 5$ , $4n < 2^n$.

1. The predicate is $P(n): 4n < 2^n$. 
2. The base case is at $n = 5$. 
3. If $n = 5$, then the left side of the inequality is $4 \cdot 5 = 20$. The right side of the inequality is $2^5 = 32$. The left side is indeed less than the right side, so the base case holds. (The predicate is true when $n=5$.)
4. Assume that for some $k > 5$, that $4k < 2^k$. 
5. Now prove that $4(k+1) < 2^{k+1}$. 

### Common mistakes

- **Putting a quantifier on the predicate:** The phrase "For every integer $n \geq 5$ " *is not* part of the predicate. Quantifying a predicate in this way makes it no longer a predicate. Leave it off. 
- **Using "for all" instead of "for some" in the inductive hypothesis**: We are not assuming the predicate is true "for all" values of $n$ because then there would be no reason to prove anything. It's an existential quantifier, not a universal one. 
- **Not putting parentheses around $k+1$ in the inductive step:** That is, saying that we are going to prove that $4k+1$ is less than $2^{k+1}$. Those parentheses are necessary because $4(k+1)$ and $4k + 1$ aren't equal. 

## C3

Explanations are provided for study/review purposes; they aren't necessary in your submissions.

1. (a) False (because the number 2 is not a set, therefore it cannot be a subset of the set on the right)

   (b) True (because you're applying the function $n^2$ to the set containing 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 *and onward* -- that's what the dots mean -- so 5 belongs to that set.)

   (c) True ($\mathbb{Z}$ is the set of *all* integers)

   (d) True (every natural number is also an integer)

   (e) True (the empty set is a subset of every set; discussed in class)

2. (a) $\lbrace    3/2, 2, 5/2 \rbrace$ or $\lbrace  1.5, 2, 2.5 \rbrace$. This is mapping the "$n/2$" function over the set. 

   (b) $\lbrace  8,9, 10 \rbrace$. This is taking the set $\lbrace  8,9,10,11 \rbrace$ and filtering it using the predicate. 

   (c) $\lbrace  2, 4, 6, 8, 10 \rbrace$. This is taking the set $\lbrace  1, 2,\dots, 10 \rbrace$ and filtering it using the predicate. 

## C4 

1. $\lbrace  3 \rbrace$
2. $\lbrace  1,2,3,5 \rbrace$
3. $\lbrace  2 \rbrace$
4. $\lbrace  1,3,5 \rbrace$ (because $B \cap C$ is empty) 
5. $\lbrace  5 \rbrace$
6. 6


## C5 

1. This is the very definition of a [license plate problem](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/License+plate+problem). There are six slots to fill. Each of the first three can be filled in 26 different ways. The last three can be filled in 36 different ways (with a letter or with a number). So the [Multiplicative Principle](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/Multiplicative+principle) says the total count is $26 \cdot 26 \cdot 26 \cdot 36 \cdot 36 \cdot 36 = 820,025,856$. 
2. We use the [Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/Principle+of+Inclusion+and+Exclusion): The total count is the number of license plates that start with a vowel, plus the number that end in an even number, minus the number that both start with a vowel *and* end in an even number. If a license plate starts with a vowel, there are five choices for the first enty, then 26 for the next two, then 36 for the remaining three which gives a count of $5 \cdot 26^2 \cdot 36^3 = 157697280$. If a license plate ends in an even number, there are 26 choices for each of the first three entries, 36 for each of the next two, and then 5 for the final one (0,2,4,6, or 8) giving a total count of $26^3 \cdot 36^2 \cdot 5 = 113892480$. If a license plate does both, then there are 5 choices for the first and last entries, 26 for the second and third, and 36 for the fourth and fifth giving $5^2 \cdot 26^2 \cdot 36^2 = 21902400$ in all. So the total count we seek is: $157697280 + 113892480 - 21902400 = 249,687,360$. 

## C6

1. (a) $9! = 9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7 \cdot 6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 362880$. 

   (b) $\displaystyle{\binom{199}{197} = \frac{199!}{197! \cdot 2!} = \frac{199 \cdot 198}{2} = 19701}$. 


2. This number is given by the binomial coefficient $\displaystyle{\binom{6}{3} = 20}$. (Note, the set $\lbrace  0,1,2,3,4,5 \rbrace$ has six elements.)

---

*Supplemental Skills coming after Thursday*

Commit message:

Initial add of solutions for supplemental skills CP7

MTH225-Winter2024/assignments/checkpoints/Checkpoint 7 guide.md, after:

# Checkpoint 7 guide 

## C1

*"If it is raining outside, then I will bring an umbrella."*

1. It is raining outside
2. I will bring an umbrella
3. If I bring an umbrella, then it is raining outside. 
4. If I don't bring an umbrella, then it is not raining outside. 
5. If it is not rainig outside, then I will not bring an umbrella. 
6. It is raining outside but I don't bring an umbrella. 

### Common mistakes

These are the same common mistakes that have appeared on past Checkpoints, so please refer to past Checkpoint guides for details. **If you are making these common mistakes repeatedly, please speak with me (Talbert) about it.**

- **Writing the converse by simply switching the locations in the sentence without actually changing the hypothesis or conclusion**: "I will bring an umbrella if it is raining outside." Again, this is the same statement as the original. 
- **Not using the correct form of the negation:** It's not an if-then statement. 

## C2

For every integer $n \geq 5$ , $4n < 2^n$.

1. The predicate is $P(n): 4n < 2^n$. 
2. The base case is at $n = 5$. 
3. If $n = 5$, then the left side of the inequality is $4 \cdot 5 = 20$. The right side of the inequality is $2^5 = 32$. The left side is indeed less than the right side, so the base case holds. (The predicate is true when $n=5$.)
4. Assume that for some $k > 5$, that $4k < 2^k$. 
5. Now prove that $4(k+1) < 2^{k+1}$. 

### Common mistakes

- **Putting a quantifier on the predicate:** The phrase "For every integer $n \geq 5$ " *is not* part of the predicate. Quantifying a predicate in this way makes it no longer a predicate. Leave it off. 
- **Using "for all" instead of "for some" in the inductive hypothesis**: We are not assuming the predicate is true "for all" values of $n$ because then there would be no reason to prove anything. It's an existential quantifier, not a universal one. 
- **Not putting parentheses around $k+1$ in the inductive step:** That is, saying that we are going to prove that $4k+1$ is less than $2^{k+1}$. Those parentheses are necessary because $4(k+1)$ and $4k + 1$ aren't equal. 

## C3

Explanations are provided for study/review purposes; they aren't necessary in your submissions.

1. (a) False (because the number 2 is not a set, therefore it cannot be a subset of the set on the right)

   (b) True (because you're applying the function $n^2$ to the set containing 0, 1, 2, 3, 4 *and onward* -- that's what the dots mean -- so 5 belongs to that set.)

   (c) True ($\mathbb{Z}$ is the set of *all* integers)

   (d) True (every natural number is also an integer)

   (e) True (the empty set is a subset of every set; discussed in class)

2. (a) $\lbrace    3/2, 2, 5/2 \rbrace$ or $\lbrace  1.5, 2, 2.5 \rbrace$. This is mapping the "$n/2$" function over the set. 

   (b) $\lbrace  8,9, 10 \rbrace$. This is taking the set $\lbrace  8,9,10,11 \rbrace$ and filtering it using the predicate. 

   (c) $\lbrace  2, 4, 6, 8, 10 \rbrace$. This is taking the set $\lbrace  1, 2,\dots, 10 \rbrace$ and filtering it using the predicate. 

## C4 

1. $\lbrace  3 \rbrace$
2. $\lbrace  1,2,3,5 \rbrace$
3. $\lbrace  2 \rbrace$
4. $\lbrace  1,3,5 \rbrace$ (because $B \cap C$ is empty) 
5. $\lbrace  5 \rbrace$
6. 6


## C5 

1. This is the very definition of a [license plate problem](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/License+plate+problem). There are six slots to fill. Each of the first three can be filled in 26 different ways. The last three can be filled in 36 different ways (with a letter or with a number). So the [Multiplicative Principle](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/Multiplicative+principle) says the total count is $26 \cdot 26 \cdot 26 \cdot 36 \cdot 36 \cdot 36 = 820,025,856$. 
2. We use the [Principle of Inclusion and Exclusion](https://publish.obsidian.md/mth225/Combinatorics/Principle+of+Inclusion+and+Exclusion): The total count is the number of license plates that start with a vowel, plus the number that end in an even number, minus the number that both start with a vowel *and* end in an even number. If a license plate starts with a vowel, there are five choices for the first enty, then 26 for the next two, then 36 for the remaining three which gives a count of $5 \cdot 26^2 \cdot 36^3 = 157697280$. If a license plate ends in an even number, there are 26 choices for each of the first three entries, 36 for each of the next two, and then 5 for the final one (0,2,4,6, or 8) giving a total count of $26^3 \cdot 36^2 \cdot 5 = 113892480$. If a license plate does both, then there are 5 choices for the first and last entries, 26 for the second and third, and 36 for the fourth and fifth giving $5^2 \cdot 26^2 \cdot 36^2 = 21902400$ in all. So the total count we seek is: $157697280 + 113892480 - 21902400 = 249,687,360$. 

## C6

1. (a) $9! = 9 \cdot 8 \cdot 7 \cdot 6 \cdot 5 \cdot 4 \cdot 3 \cdot 2 \cdot 1 = 362880$. 

   (b) $\displaystyle{\binom{199}{197} = \frac{199!}{197! \cdot 2!} = \frac{199 \cdot 198}{2} = 19701}$. 


2. This number is given by the binomial coefficient $\displaystyle{\binom{6}{3} = 20}$. (Note, the set $\lbrace  0,1,2,3,4,5 \rbrace$ has six elements.)

---

## S1 and S2

There were no attempts on S1 and only one attempt on S2. If you attempted S2, please [use a calculator](https://www.calculator.net/binary-calculator.html) to check your work. 

## S3

## S4

## S5

## S6

## S7

## S8
