Guided Practice for MTH 325: Section 9.2
========================================

## Overview 

In this section we expand on our basic notions of graphs in three ways. First, we introduce some important terminology for graphs, including the concept of the _degree_ of a vertex and related ideas for directed graphs. Second, we establish three basic mathematical results about undirected graphs, the most important of which is the _Handshaking Theorem_ (Theorem 1 in this section) which specifies a relationship between the number of edges in a graph and the degrees of the vertices in the graph. Third, we introduce some special families of graphs (_complete_, _cycle_, _wheel_, and _n-cube_ graphs as well as _bipartite_ graphs) that are useful in theory and in applications. 


## Learning Objectives in this section

+ CC.12: State the definitions of the following terms: Adjacent nodes; incident; degree of a vertex in an undirected graph; initial and terminal vertices of a directed edge; in-degree and out-degree of a vertex in a digraph; complete graph on n vertices; cycle graph; wheel graph; n-cube graph; bipartite graph; complete bipartite graph; subgraph. 
+ CC.13: Given an undirected graph, determine if two nodes are adjacent; determine if an edge is incident with two nodes; and find the degree of a vertex. 
+ CC.14: Given a directed graph, determine if two notes are adjacent from each other; and find the in- and out-degree of a vertex. 
+ CC.15: Draw examples of the cycle, wheel, n-cube, and complete bipartite graphs. 
+ CC.16: State the Handshaking Theorem and Theorem 2. 
+ M.14: Explain how the Handshaking Theorem is proven and how it is used to prove Theorem 2. 
+ M.15 (CORE): Use the Handshaking Theorem and Theorem 2 to draw conclusions about edges and nodes in a graph. 

## Resources for learning

For basic preparation, please read __all of Section 9.2__ in the Rosen textbook. 

## Activities 

As always, work out the activities below in your notes for future reference and questions. Then go to the submission form at: 

[http://bit.ly/1DxZhIv](http://bit.ly/1DxZhIv)

and put your answers in the indicated areas. There is a link to a Google Form at which you can leave and upvote any questions you have on what you've read and worked with; your answers will help set the agenda for the class meeting. 

Before doing the exercises below, you'll need to try out some new commands in Sage. Open up a Sage notebook and enter the following: 

    g = graphs.RandomGNM(10,15)
    g.show()

This will generate a random graph with 10 nodes and 15 edges, then display it. Now try the following _in a separate cell_ so that the `g` graph above isn't re-created: 

    g.degree(1)

Look at your graph and see if you can tell what this command does. (Hint: Remind yourself of the definition of "degree" of a vertex first.) Then try entering 

    g.degree()

without something in the parenthesis, and see what this does. 

Now let's see how Sage can generate some of the graphs you read about in the section. Try entering: 

    g = graphs.CompleteGraph(5)
    g.show() 

For fun, replace the 5 with something larger! Then try: 

    g = graphs.CycleGraph(5)
    g.show()

Now try:

    g = graphs.WheelGraph(5)
    g.show()

__Important__: Compare the output here to the graph of $W_5$ on page 601 and notice that these are _not_ the same graph. You'll need to beware when using Sage to work with wheel graphs, since Sage and your book don't agree on the terminology. Finally, try: 

    g = graphs.CubeGraph(3)
    g.show()

For a head rush, replace the 3 with something larger. 

You now know how to use Sage to generate a random graph; find the degree of a particular node; generate a list of the degrees of all the nodes in a graph; and how to generate complete, wheel, cycle, and cube graphs. Now you are ready to work on the exercises. 

1. The n-cube graph (see page 602, or your Sage work from above) has $2^n$ nodes, each labelled by a unique bitstring of length $n$. What is the degree of each of these nodes? On the form, state your answer (in terms of $n$) and give a one sentence (or less) explanation. 
2. The 10-cube graph is a specific instance of the n-cube graph. It has $2^{10} = 1024$ nodes (each labelled with a bitstring of length 10), which makes it hard to visualize even with a computer (although you are welcome to try). How many _edges_ does the 10-cube graph have? Figure this out in Sage and paste the code you use into the box at the form. There are at least two ways to do this -- and in class we'll discuss both ways and why they are equivalent. 
3. Consider the _directed_ graph show [here](http://goo.gl/niznKx). State the in-degree and out-degree of each node. Can you figure out a way to determine the in- and out-degrees of the nodes using Sage? If so, explain how you did it. 