# MTH 225 Guided Practice 1.1: Set Notation and Relations

## Overview

We begin our study of discrete structures with the most fundamental object in both math and computer science: the _set_. Sets are collections of objects -- a kind of very basic "data structure" that we will use in nearly all of our work. In this section, we'll learn about the basic terminology and notation for sets, including: _enumeration_ and _set-builder_ notation for sets, what it means for an object to be an _element_ of a set; what it means for one set to be a _subset_ of another; and the _cardinality_ of a set. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Identify the frequently used sets $\mathbb{P}$, $\mathbb{N}$, $\mathbb{Z}$, $\mathbb{Q}$, $\mathbb{R}$, $\mathbb{C}$, and $\emptyset$. 
+ Given a set in set-builder notation, write the set in roster notation.
+ Determine whether an object is an element of a set or not, and express this using correct notation. 
+ Determine whether a set is a subset of some other set, and express this realtionship using correct notation. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Given a set in roster notation, write it in set-builder notation.
+ Determine whether two sets are equal.
+ State the cardinality of a finite set. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 1.1. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos, which have a total running time of 21 minutes, 58 seconds. These are made for the course MTH 210 (Communicating in Mathematics) which has significant content overlap with MTH 225. However some terminology and notation may be used differently. In the event of differences in notation, default to the notation used in yout textbook. __In particular:__ Please note that in your book, the set $\mathbb{N}$ is taken to include the number 0, whereas 0 is not in $\mathbb{N}$ in the videos. What the videos define as $\mathbb{N}$ is defined in the book as $\mathbb{P}$. 

+ [Sets and set notation](https://youtu.be/01OoCH-2UWc) (Running time = 5:34) 
+ [Elements, subsets, and set equality](https://youtu.be/kGyOrbbllEY) (7:00) 
+ [Set-builder notation](https://youtu.be/DEhWj-52rlw) (9:24)

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Consider the set $A$ given in set-builder notation by: $A = \{ \alpha \in \ \text{the alphabet} \, | \, \alpha \, \text{precedes the letter F} \}$. In the blank at the response form, write $A$ in roster notation, including the use of correct set bracket notation. 
2. Consider the set $B = \left\{ \dfrac{1}{2^n} \, | \, n \in \ \mathbb{Z} \right\}$. In the blank at the response form, list at least five elements of this set.  
3. Look at Exercise 5 on page 13 of your textbook. This lists three sets A, B, and C and then eight statements about elements and subsets. Some, but not all, of these statements are true. At the response form, these eight subparts are listed out as checkbox items. Check ALL the items that you think are true and leave unchecked any item you think is false. 

There is a final item at the response form that solicits any specific mathematical questions or comments you may have about the material in the reading or viewing. If you have any specific mathematical questions, leave them in the blank. Frequently occurring questions will be addressed during the discussion time in class. Other questions (good but not frequently occurring) will be replied to in person on through email. If you have no questions, just leave that item blank. 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1J7IHRL](http://bit.ly/1J7IHRL)