# MTH 225 Guided Practice 1.3: Cartesian Products and Power Sets

## Overview

In the last lesson we learned about _operations_ that we can perform on sets (union, intersection, complement, and symmetric difference). In this lesson we focus on two more set operations that will be particularly important in later studies of discrete structures: 

+ The _Cartesian product_ of two sets, which is a way of forming a set of ordered pairs of elements; and 
+ The _power set_ of a set, which is a set containing all the subsets of the original set. (Did you get all that?)

As before, we want to focus not only on computing these sets but getting an early glimpse as to what's _universally true_ about them. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Given two finite sets $A$ and $B$, write out their Cartesian product $A \times B$ in roster notation.
+ Given a finite set $A$, write out its power set $\mathcal{P}(A)$ in roster notation.  

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Given three or more finite sets, write out their Cartesian product $A \times B$ in roster notation. 
+ Determine whether an object is or is not an element of the power set of a set. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 1.3. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos:

+ [Cartesian Products Made Easy](https://youtu.be/HqZZwoTYElo) (5:00) This has a nice alternative description of forming the Cartesian product using a table. 
+ [Proof and Problem Solving -- More Sets](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UEcRlxRCfco) The video is 5:09 long, but you can stop watching after 3:08 because the presenter goes into some advanced counting concepts we will take up later. Note also the presenter uses the notation $\{ \}$ for the empty set instead of $\emptyset$. 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 


1. Let $A = \{10, 20, 30\}$ and $B = \{x,y,z\}$. Write out the Cartesian product $A \times B$ in roster notation. Note that there will be nine elements. 
2. Using the sets $A$ and $B$ from question 1, is $A \times B$ the same thing as $B \times A$? Why or why not? 
3. Using the set $B$ from question 1, write out the power set $\mathcal{P}(B)$ in roster notation. 
4. Let $T$ be the set of all user accounts on Twitter (like @GVSUmath, @RobertTalbert, @realDonaldTrump, etc.). What does the set $T \times T$ look like, and why might this set be useful for the people who use or manage Twitter? 

---

There is a final item at the response form that solicits any specific mathematical questions or comments you may have about the material in the reading or viewing. If you have any specific mathematical questions, leave them in the blank. Frequently occurring questions will be addressed during the discussion time in class. Other questions (good but not frequently occurring) will be replied to in person on through email. If you have no questions, just leave that item blank. 

---


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1Eht3qe](http://bit.ly/1Eht3qe)