# MTH 225 Guided Practice 1.5: Summation Notation and Generalizations	

## Overview

Our last topic in Sets connects some concepts from set theory to the upcoming unit on Counting. In this lesson, we will introduce a shorthand for adding up a list of integers that is defined by a _pattern_. Several times during our study of sets, you've been asked to do this although it may not have been obvious this was going on. For example, you were asked to develop an algorithm for finding the cardinality of the union of two sets, which involved careful counting --- which involves _adding things up using a pattern_. We will use this summation notation to make calculations, but more importantly, a summation notation is like a little computer program, so it gives us an opportunity to think computationally. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Given a sum written in summation notation, compute the value of the sum.  

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Given a sum written "longhand", identify the pattern in the terms and then write it in correct summation notation. 
+ Given unions and intersections of sets written in "generalized format", find the value of the set operation. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 1.5. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following videos:

+ [Summation notation](https://youtu.be/hEPk36Yncxg) (10:15) _WARNING_: Audio is terrible. 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Compute the value of the summation: $\displaystyle{\sum_{i = 1}^{10} (i^3 - 2i)}$. 
2. Compute the value of the summation: $\displaystyle{\sum_{i = -3}^3 2^i}$. 
3. Consider the sum $2 + 4 + 6 + 8 + 10 + \cdots + 100$. The value of this sum is 2550. Write the sum using summation notation. Since you can't enter mathematical notation at the Google Form, format your answer as follows: `Sum[formula, {i, start, end}]` where `formula` is the formula for the terms that uses the variable `i`, `start` is the starting value of `i`, and `end` is the ending value of `i`. For example,  $\displaystyle{\sum_{i = 1}^10 i^2}$ would be written `Sum[i^2, {i, 1, 10}]`. We use this notation because you can use this format directly in Wolfram|Alpha -- [see this example](http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=Sum%5Bi%5E2%2C+%7Bi%2C+1%2C+10%7D%5D). 

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1EhBOAB](http://bit.ly/1EhBOAB)