# MTH 225 Guided Practice 2.1: Basic Counting Techniques -- The Rule of Products

## Overview

_Counting_ seems like a pretty low level topic for a college math class, but when you think about it, counting can be hard. How many ways are there to enter in a password into an ATM? How many times does a recursive computer program make a function call as it progresses? Finding the number of ways a complex arrangement can take place _without actually listing_ all those arrangements is a task in discrete mathematics that is essential for computer science. In this section we take our first serious look at counting by studying the _Rule of Products_ which gives a method for counting arrangements that result from an independent sequence of choices. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Use the Rule of Products to count the number of arrangements that result from an independent sequence of choices. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Identify situations when the Rule of Products would _not_ apply. 
+ State the cardinality of the power set of a finite set and explain. 

## Learning resources 

Actually for this Guided Practice, it's best if you don't read or watch anything beforehand, but just try the exercises below. We'll use class time to draw conclusions and abstractions from your work. 

## Exercises

Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. A _bit_ is a binary digit, that is either a 1 or a 0. Bits are the "atoms" of computer science. A _bit string_ is, well, a string of bits. For example `01100101` is a bit string. This particular bit string has _length_ equal to 8. How many bit strings are there that have length 4? On the submission form, state your answer and then list all of the bit strings of length 4. 
2. Assume for the moment that the number of bit strings of length 9 is 512. (This is correct actually and if you had time, you could check it.) How many bit strings are there of length 10? How are you able to easily tell this just by knowing that there are 512 bit strings of length 9? 
3. How many ways are there to create a two-letter "word" out of the standard English alphabet? For example `PZ` would be a two-letter "word". Reminder: There are 26 letters in the alphabet. _Do not try to list all of these out_ like you did with the bit strings (unless you have lots of free time). Instead explain how you got your answer without making that list. 
4. Assume for the moment that the number of five-letter "words" made from English letters is 11,881,376. How many _six_-letter words can be made? Explain. 
5. How many ways are there to make a string that consists of three English letters followed by a string of 8 bits, such as `YYZ10100010`? Explain. For the love of God, _don't_ try to list all of them. 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1hOZF0M](http://bit.ly/1hOZF0M)