# MTH 225 Guided Practice 2.2: Permutations 

## Overview

In our previous lesson, we learned to use the Rule of Products to count arrangements that are made by a sequence of independent choices. But not all arrangements are made this way, meaning that we need more tools to solve problems where the Rule of Products doesn't apply. One such problem has to do with _permutations_ or "shufflings" of a group of items. For example, if you have five people who want to go on a road trip, and there are five seats in the car, how many ways are there to arrange people in the car? What if there were six seats and one of the seats could stay open? It gets complicated, so we need the math of permutations to help us think. 

Also in this section, an important mathematical calculation: The _factorial_ of an integer. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Calculate the factorial of an integer.
+ Calculate the total number of permuations of $k$ elements taken from a set of $n$ elements. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Apply the concept of permutations to solve counting problems. 
+ Apply the concept of permutations together with the Rule of Products to solve counting problems. 

## Learning resources 

This is another section where you'll learn more if you _don't_ read or view videos prior to class but rather just play with the exercises below. However you do need to search up the definition of the _factorial_. This is in the book or you can Google it. Also learn how to calculate factorials on your calculator or computer software. 

## Exercises

Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. How many three-digit numbers can you make using only the digits 3, 5, and 7 -- assuming repetitions of the digits is OK? For example: 335 and 735 are OK. State your answer and list all the possible arrangements. 
2. How many three-digit numbers can you make using only the digits 3, 5, and 7 -- assuming repetitions of the digits is _not_ OK? For example: 735 is still OK, but 335 is not. State your answer and list all the possible arrangements. 
3. How many five-digit numbers can you make using only the digits 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 and assuming that repetitions are not allowed? State your answer but _do not list all of these_, rather explain why your answer is right. How would your answer change if repetition were allowed? 
4. How many _three_-digit numbers can you make, using the _five_ digits 1, 3, 5, 7, and 9 without repeating any of the digits? State your answer and explain your reasoning. 
5. Basic practice: Compute the numbers 5! and 3! ("five factorial" and "three factorial"). What role did these numbers play in the first four questions? 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1NT4oKK](http://bit.ly/1NT4oKK)