# MTH 225 Guided Practice 2.3: Partitions of Sets and the Laws of Addition

## Overview

Earlier we examined a rules for counting arrangements given by a sequence of independent choices, and this gave us the _Rule of Products_. In this lesson we look at a related counting problem where we are counting arrangements that can be broken down into _possible cases_. This deals with an underlying mathematical problem of how to _partition a set_ -- that is, breaking a set apart into non-overlapping subsets. We'll learn a _Law of Addition_ that complements the Rule of Products in this situation as well as its generalization, the _Inclusion-Exclusion Principle._

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Count the items in a set using the Basic Law of Addition. 
+ Count the items in a set using the Inclusion-Exclusion Laws. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Determine whether a collection of subsets of a set partitions the set. 
+ Solve counting problems involving permutations, the Rule of Products, and the Inclusion-Exclusion Laws. 

## Learning resources 

Once again, this material is best learned by playing with simple exercises first, and then we will layer on the terminology and rules after you have played with them a while. So, you may refer to Section 2.3 in _ADS_ if you like, but it will make more sense after you have done the exercises below. 

## Exercises

Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. University IT is trying do run some data on student G-numbers. They found that there are 5500 students whose G-numbers end in a "7", and 3200 students whose G-numbers end in a "1". How many students have G-numbers that end in either a 1 or a 7? State your answer and explain. 
2. The university registrar's office is also doing a study of student data. They found that 700 students are majoring in math, and 850 are majoring in computer science. The registrar's report claims that 1550 different students on campus are majoring in either math or CS. Is this correct? If it is, explain why. If not, explain exactly what the error was and what the office would need to do to get the right number. 
3. A _prime number_ is a positive integer greater than 1 that is divisible only by 1 and itself. Examples of primes include 2, 3, 5, 7, and 17. Examples of non-primes include 4, 10, and 15. It turns out that there are 25 prime numbers less than 100 (See: [http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=Prime+numbers+less+than+100](http://www.wolframalpha.com/input/?i=Prime+numbers+less+than+100), click on "More" to see the entire list). How many positive integers less than 100 are there that are _either_ prime _or_ end in a 3 (like 33 or 73)? State your answer and explain how you got it, _without_ doing an exhaustive list or search. 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1VtxX7Z](http://bit.ly/1VtxX7Z)