# MTH 225 Guided Practice 2.4: Combinations and the Binomial Theorem

## Overview

We've almost assembled a complete suite of mathematical tools for working with counting problems: 

+ The _Rule of Products_ to help with counting arrangements given by a sequence of independent choices. 
+ _Permutations_ to help with arrangements of $k$ objects in order, taken from a set of $n$ objects. 
+ _Set partitions_ and the _Rules for Inclusion-Exclusion_ to help with counting arrangements given by counting subsets. 

Just one distinct kind of problem remains for us: What if we wanted to count the number of ways to arrange $k$ objects taken from a set of $n$ objects but _didn't_ care about the order? The resulting idea is called a _combination_ and we will learn about these, and a powerful related idea called the _Binomial Theorem_ in this lesson. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Find the number of combinations of $k$ items taken from a set of $n$ items. 
+ Calculate the binomial coefficient $\binom{n}{k}$ for given values of $n$ and $k$. 
+ State the Binomial Theorem.

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Use the Binomial Theorem to find a given term of a binomial expression.
+ Count the items in an arrangement using an appropriate combination of counting rules. 

## Learning resources 

This time there is just a little bit of reading to do. Namely: Read in _ADS_ section 2.4 -- or on Google -- the definition of the _binomial coefficient_, which is denoted by $\binom{n}{k}$. Also read the statement of the _Binomial Theorem_ (which again is in your book, or you can Google it) and reflect on what the theorem is telling you. For review: A "theorem" is a mathematical statement that has been proven to be true for all cases that satisfy the condition of the statement. (For example, the Binomial Theorem is an equation that is supposed to hold true for all integers $n \geq 0$ and for all real numbers $x$ and $y$ -- that's the "condition".)

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Compute the values of $\binom{4}{3}$ and $\binom{4}{2}$. 
2. On a separate piece of scratch paper, write down all the ways to make a three-letter string out of the letters a, b, c, d, without repeating any letter. For example: `cdb`, `adc` are OK but not `aac`. You should end up with 24 of these strings. (Think: How could you have known that without listing them?) Now on your list, use a colored pen or highlighter to color/highlight two strings the same color if they have the same letters in them. For example `adc` and `cda` would be colored the same, but `adc` and `adb` would be colored differently. How many colors do you need? 
3. Explain how the previous question and its answer would change if you were making two-letter strings instead of three-letter strings. (All other parameters of the question are the same.) 
4. What does the first exercise in this assignment have to do with the second and third questions? 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1VtBzqA](http://bit.ly/1VtBzqA)