# MTH 225 Guided Practice 3.1: Propositions and Logical Operators

## Overview

This lesson begins our third main topic area in the course, and many consider it to be the heart of both discrete math and computer science -- the study of _logic_. Logic is the language that allows us to write computer programs that make decisions; it also allows us a framework to think more clearly about the world around us. In our introductory lesson in logic, we'll look at the building blocks of logic, namely _propositions_ and _operators_ that apply to and combine propositions. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Write the truth tables for conjunction, disjunction, negation, the conditional operator, and the biconditional operator.
+ Write the converse of a conditional statement.
+ Express logical propositions that are written in English using symbolic form, and translate propositions from symbolic form to English. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Write the contrapositive of a conditional statement. 
+ Determine the condition(s) under which a conditional statement is false. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 3.1. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. Also: Look up the definition of the __contrapositive__ of a conditional statement. [Here is one source](http://www.mathwords.com/c/contrapositive.htm). 

__Video__: Watch the following videos. Some things to note: (1) The first video uses the term "statement" whereas we will use the term "proposition". (2) The second video uses `T` and `F` for true and false whereas your book uses the bits `1` and `0` for true and false respectively. (This bit notation is common in CS and engineering.)

+ [Statements and Non-Statements](https://youtu.be/UuETUEJo0rk) (5:37)
+ [Introduction to Logic](https://youtu.be/OLGVhszBlq4), watch only up through 4:33 and you don't need to know about quantifiers of statements yet. 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

Let the variable $d$ represent the proposition, "I like discrete structures"; let $c$ be the proposition "I will pass this class", and $s$ the proposition "I will complete this assignment". You may be asked to type in a logical symbolic statement into the submission form; use the letter "v" for the "or" operator, the caret "^" for "and", the squiggle "~" for negation, and "->" for implication.

1. Express the English statement "I like discrete structures and I will pass this course" in symbolic form, using the variable names above and some of the symbols for logical operators. 
2. Consider the proposition $d \rightarrow (c \wedge s)$. Rewrite this proposition as a correct and legible English sentence. 
3. Consider the proposition "If I complete this assignment, then I will pass this class." Write both the converse and the contrapositives of this proposition. 
4. Consider "If I complete this assignment, then I will pass this class." Under what condition will this statement be false? 
5. Can you think of a conditional (if-then) statement which is true, but whose converse is false? If so, write that statement in the blank. If not, write "none found". 

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1LLHFxX](http://bit.ly/1LLHFxX)