# MTH 225 Guided Practice 3.4: Laws of Logic 

## Overview

We're pretty fluent at this point with logical propositions and how they can b combined, and how to use truth tables to know if two propositions are equivalent (although they may look different). What's next is to find some important equivalences that could be useful for us in reasoning through coding or mathematical problems. In this section we will discover a lengthy list of these _laws of logic_, by using truth tables to establish them. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Use a truth table to prove one or more of the Laws of Logic in this section. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Apply one or more of the Laws of Logic to simplify or rewrite a logical expression. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 3.4. There's not that much to read, actually. The main thing to get out of the reading is the names of the various laws given. You do _not_ need to memorize these; just know where to find them in the table you're given. 

__Video__: No video to watch this time. 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. The _Involution Law_ in this section says that $\neg (\neg p)$ is logically equivalent to $p$. This is what the notation $\neg (\neg p) \Leftrightarrow p$ means. Explain in everyday terms why it's reasonable to believe this, without needing a truth table. 
2. Explain how you would prove the Involution Law above using a truth table. 
3. Consider the following block of Python code. You should be able to read and make sense of this code even if you don't know Python. There's nothing _wrong_ with the code in a syntax or semantic sense, but it could be made simpler. Explain how, using one of the Laws of Logic. 
    
        if (x > 0) and (x > 0 or y == 3):
            print('Never gonna give you up)

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1ObWz2G](http://bit.ly/1ObWz2G)