# MTH 225 Guided Practice 3.3: Propositions over a Universe

## Overview

At this point we know a lot about logical propositions. We know what they are, we know how to use truth tables to determine when they are true, and we know how to tell if two of them are equivalent. In this section we look at a more general version of propositions in which the proposition contains a _variable_, so that the proposition is true for some values of the variable but not necessarily for others. These are called _propositions over a universe_ or more commonly _predicates_. Predicates are vitally important for the mathematical content of the course moving forward, and so here we look at determining the _truth set_ of a predicate and _equivalence_ of predicates.

__To reiterate:__ We will use the more common term _predicate_ from here on out to refer to what's called a "proposition over a universe" in your book. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Distinguish between a predicate and a proposition. 
+ Determine whether a predicate is true for a given value of the variable(s). That is, determine whether a particular element of the universal set is or is not in the truth set of a predicate. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Find the entire truth set for a predicate. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _Applied Discrete Structures_, read Section 3.6. Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: Watch the following video. Note that the video uses yet another term, "open sentence", which is also a synonym for "proposition over a universe". That is, "proposition over a universe" = "predicate" = "open sentence". 

+ [Open sentences and truth sets](https://youtu.be/fioagzqOdpo) (7:23) 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

1. Is the statement "The number x is a perfect square", where the universal set is the set of integers, a proposition or a predicate? Explain. 
2. On the universe of positive integers, consider the statement "n is prime and n < 32". At the submission form are a few positive integers. Select ALL the positive integers that belong to the truth set of this statement. 
3. On the universe of positive integers, consider the statement "n is a power of 3". At the submission form are a few positive integers. Select ALL the positive integers that belong to the truth set of this statement. 
4. On the universe of positive integers, consider the statement "n divides 27". At the submission form are a few positive integers. Select ALL the positive integers that belong to the truth set of this statement. 


## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1j9lQiQ](http://bit.ly/1j9lQiQ)