# MTH 325 Guided Practice 8.2/8.3a: Sequences and Recurrence Relations

## Overview

In our previous lesson on recursion, we learned about recursion. (See what I did there?) One of our examples of recursion was the _Fibonacci sequence_ which is an infinite list of integers that are defined using recursion. In this lesson, we will dig deeper into recursively-defined sequences and introduce a key mathematical tool for understanding them -- the _recurrence relation_ and _solutions_ to recurrence relations. By studying recurrence relations and their solutions, we'll be able to take sequences defined recursively and write them using a closed form expression. 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). 

+ Given a recursively defined sequence, generate several elements of the sequence. 
+ Given a recurrence relation, identify its order. 
+ Given an n-th order linear recurrence relation, identify its coefficients. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Given a recurrence relation and a proposed solution, determine if the proposed solution really is a solution. 

## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _ADS_, read Section 8.2 and 8.3 up through the subsection titled "Recurrence Relations Obtained from 'Solutions'". Make sure to read actively, working through examples and activities as you go. 

__Video__: No video this time. 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

Consider the sequence $S$ defined by $S(0) = 3$, $S(1) = 11$, and the remaining terms of the sequence are defined by the recurrence relation $S(k) = 10 S(k-1) - 9 S(k-2)$. 

1. Determine the values of $S(3)$, $S(4)$, and $S(5)$. 
2. State the order of the recurrence relation. (There's a multiple choice item for this.) 
3. Consider the closed-form expression $F(k) = 9^k + 2$. Find $F(0), F(1), \dots, F(5)$. What does this suggest about the relationship between $F(k)$ and the recurrence relation for $S(k)$? 
4. Does the fact that $F(k)$ and $S(k)$ match for the first six terms mean that $F(k)$ is a solution for the recurrence relation? Explain why or why not. 

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1K5Jjqu](http://bit.ly/1K5Jjqu)