# MTH 325 Guided Practice 9.3: Connectivity

## Overview

In this section we take up what at first appears to be a pair of almost trivial questions: (1) Given two vertices in a graph, is there a path between them?, and (2) if so, what is that path? The idea of having paths between distinct vertices is at the heart of the issue of _connectivity_. You’ll be learning what it means for a graph to be _connected_ (and in the case of a directed graph, _strongly connected_), and we’ll examine three algorithms for determining whether two vertices are connected by a path. One of those algorithms involves the _transitive closure_ and therefore powers of the graph’s adjacency matrix. The other two introduce two very important search algorithms, the Breadth-First Search (BFS) and the Depth-First Seach (DFS). 

## Learning objectives

__Basic objectives__: Each student is responsible for gaining proficiency with each of these tasks _prior_ to engaging in class discussions, through the use of the learning resources (below) and through the working of exercises (also below). Note that important new terminology is given in italics. 

+ Give examples of connected graphs and non-connected graphs, and determine visually whether a graph is connected or not. 
+ State Theorem 9.3.1 and explain what it says. 
+ Determine whether two vertices in a graph are connected by a path by examining the adjacency matrix for the graph's transitive closure. 

__Advanced objectives__: The following objectives are the subject of class discussion and further work; they should be mastered by each student _during_ and _following_ class discussions. 

+ Find a path between two vertices in a graph using a breadth-first search. 
+ Find a path between two vertices in a graph using a depth-first search. 
+ Use Sage to do the following: find a shortest path between two vertices in a graph; perform a breadth-first search starting at a vertex; perform a depth-first search starting at a vertex.


## Learning resources 

To gain proficiency in the learning objectives, use the following resources. You may include other resources if you wish, in addition to or in replacement of the following. 

__Textbook__: In _ADS_, read Section 9.3 -- but skip the entire part that begins with "Method 2: Broadcasting" up to Example 9.3.2; then use Example 9.3.2 to practice breadth-first search; then skip the "Mathematica note", and end by working with the "Sage Note" (again, have Sage up in front of you so you can practice the coding).  The Sage Note shows you how to use Sage's built-ins for doing breadth- and depth-first searches and for finding the shortest path between vertices in a graph. 

__Video:__:

+ [Breadth first search](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YYHeXhfwg3g) (2:36)
+ [Depth first search](http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mE_PCK0oFyo) (2:22) 

## Exercises

The following exercises are to be done _during_ and _following_ your reading and viewing of the resources. Work these out on paper and then enter the responses into the appropriate submission form (see Submission Instructions) by the deadline. You will receive a mark of __Pass__ if each item response shows a good-faith effort to be right and is submitted prior to the deadline. 

Consider the following adjacency matrix for a graph on 8 vertices: 
$$\left(\begin{array}{rrrrrrrr}
0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 0
\end{array}\right)$$

1. Suppose there is a path from one vertex to another in this graph. What does Theorem 9.3.1 say about the length of such a path? 
2. Let $M$ be the adjacency matrix above. Here is the sum of the first 8 powers of $M$, computed using the Boolean product we first learned in Chapter 8: 

$$M + M^2 + M^3 + \cdots + M^8 = \left(\begin{array}{rrrrrrrr}
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 \\
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 & 1 & 1 & 0 \\
0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1 & 0 & 0 & 1
\end{array}\right)$$

According to "Method 1" in your textbook, is the original graph connected? Explain how you know. 

3. Assume that the vertices in this graph are $0, 1, 2, \dots, 7$. In this graph, which vertices are connected to each other? For example we can tell from the original adjacency matrix that 0 is connected to 3 by a direct edge (that is, a path of length 1). 

## Submission instructions

Submit your responses using the form at this link: [http://bit.ly/1R1Ggou](http://bit.ly/1R1Ggou)