Spring2022-225/startup-mth225-sp22.md, before:

---
tags: 225-spr22
---

# MTH 225 Spring 2022 Startup Activity

To get off to a great start in MTH 225, complete all parts of this activity. Each part is its own self-contained mini-activity that will get you familiar with some key part of the course. **You can complete these in any order you wish.** 

Some of them may take more effort than others, but **I estimate it will take about 2-3 hours total to complete all parts**. Each part has instructions on how to complete the tasks, and what constitutes a successful completion. Please **complete all parts no later than 11:59pm ET on Wednesday, May 11** --- we will be assuming that you're familiar with all of these tasks below from that point forward. 

:::info
**You can ask a question about any part of this activity to anyone, at any time.** This activity is not bound by [the syllabus](https://hackmd.io/TchC8fZORJ29EgxQb1O4lQ) rules on academic honesty, so collaboration is fully encouraged! You can ask individual questions on [the course Padlet](https://padlet.com/talbertr1/6itl6dvga4zytpc1). 
:::

## Part 1: Scanning and uploading a PDF 

Something you'll be doing almost every day is **handwriting solutions to problems and then uploading them to Blackboard for grading**. In this part, you will: 

* Use a scanning app for your phone and tablet to convert handwritten work on paper to a legible PDF
* Upload a PDF to a Blackboard assignment area 

[Click here for a separate page that has instructions on how to do these things](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P6ShKUzlmMEMLxJc-EpxyRT2HELK-0KriZqDdWqstdk/edit?usp=sharing). Once you have read that document, **do the following**: 

1. Handwrite something on paper or a whiteboard --- anything at all will do. Then use a scanning app of your choice to scan the work to a legible, black-and-white PDF file. Save the file to your computer. (Give it whatever file name you want.) **As mentioned in the instructions: Use a scanning app and don't just take a photo; and make sure the file is a PDF and not an image.** 
2. On your course Blackboard site, there is an Assignment area called "Scan and Upload Practice". Upload your PDF to the assignment area. 

*Note:* If you plan on doing handwritten work using a tablet instead (for example, an iPad with Notabilty) then rather than using a scanning app, use the tablet to create the handwritten PDF and then upload. You'll need to know how to export your handwritten notes from the tablet app to a PDF; this varies from one app to another. 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You successfully uploaded a PDF of your handwritten work, that is legible. 
:::

Once you've uploaded your file, I'll "grade" it with a "1" if everything is OK, and a "0" otherwise. This point does not factor into any grade in the course. I will also leave a feedback note on your file, just like you'll see on real assignments; if you don't see it or can't read it, let me know immediately. 

## Part 2: Getting oriented in WeBWorK 

:::warning
Coming prior to week 1 -- currently waiting for WeBWorK courses to refresh following Winter 2022 semester
:::

## Part 3: Navigating and writing on the online whiteboard

**[Miro](http://miro.com)** is an online whiteboard and collaboration tool that we will use extensive in class activities and in between classes. It's available as a webpage at the link above (http://miro.com). There are also [desktop apps for macOS and Windows](https://help.miro.com/hc/en-us/articles/360017572854-Desktop-app), and mobile apps for [iOS](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/miro-online-whiteboard/id1180074773) and [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.realtimeboard). 

For this Part, **do the following**: 

1. Sign up on Miro using [this link](https://miro.com/welcomeonboard/VnJzckUwVHptMkVzdWtTWThsdlNPa2JIWW4yT29ER1psMXBZaHFNdFVQOWI0emFTQXF2UjNwaHhlVVNHVm9MN3wzMDc0NDU3MzQ5MzUyMTczOTI5?share_link_id=832910622003): 
> https://miro.com/welcomeonboard/VnJzckUwVHptMkVzdWtTWThsdlNPa2JIWW4yT29ER1psMXBZaHFNdFVQOWI0emFTQXF2UjNwaHhlVVNHVm9MN3wzMDc0NDU3MzQ5MzUyMTczOTI5?share_link_id=832910622003

2. Then [click on this link](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5Vq85o=/?share_link_id=850780074478) and follow the steps to go through a quick tutorial about Miro. Direct link: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5Vq85o=/?share_link_id=850780074478
3. Then [click on this link](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5YC1sg=/?share_link_id=990302407015) to do an activity where you'll write on the board, make a sticky note on the board, upload an image to the board, and leave a comment on something on the board. Instructions are on the board at the link. Direct link: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5YC1sg=/?share_link_id=990302407015 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You've completed the four tasks found on the board (and left your name on each to let me know you did them).  
:::



## Part 4: Commenting on documents and video with Perusall

**[Perusall](https://app.perusall.com/)** is a tool for commenting on and asking questions about readings and video. It is a crucial part of your coursework as you interact with classmates and the professor in between class meetings and prepare for activities. 

You can access Perusall by [clicking this link](https://app.perusall.com/) or directly at https://app.perusall.com/. Please watch the following video which walks you through the account setup process and shows you how Perusall works. The class code you need is `TALBERT-WDT74`. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_PfAc0D2erk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Once you've watched the video, **do the following**: 

1. Set up your account on Perusall and log in. 
2. You will see an Assignment called **Startup Activity Part 4** that is due by 11:59pm ET on Wednesday, May 11. **Click to open that assignment.**
3. **Complete the assignment.** You'll see instructions once the assignment is open. It involves reading through a PDF of the course syllabus and leaving a comment or a question; then doing the same with a video from the course playlist. 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You've set up your account and completed the assignment by leaving a comment or question on both the syllabus and the video.
:::

*Note:* Perusall will assign a score to your comments or questions using a machine learning algorithm that determines how substantive the content is. That score *does not* matter for this assignment. In fact I am not entirely sure how it works, so your work here will help me. 

## Part 5: Learning the syllabus 

After Parts 1-4, you'll have learned the basics of most of the course tools we will use. Now it's time to learn about the course itself by getting comfortable with the syllabus. 

You can access the syllabus by [clicking this link](https://hackmd.io/@rtalbert235/SksWU-sE9) or directly at https://hackmd.io/@rtalbert235/SksWU-sE9. A PDF copy will be available on Blackboard. Once you have accessed the syllabus, **do the following**: 

1. *Read through the syllabus from beginning to end*. You don't need to remember or comprehend everything, but do take note of anything that seems confusing or unusual, and go back and read those again. The main idea is to *familiarize yourself with what is in the syllabus and where things are located* so you can search things up later. **Note that you'll already have completed this if you've done Part 4 (*Commenting on documents and video with Perusall*)**. 
2. Then [click here to take a 20-question quiz](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdPgXsjSCvx_8KZ_6S5uPWe2JxzGMCppdEdzaL2EHTDImaU5Q/viewform) over the syllabus. 


:::success
**Successful completion means:** You have scored **at least 18 out of 20** points on the quiz. 
:::

Please note: 

- You can have the syllabus and other course documents out in front of you while taking the quiz. Again the purpose here is to learn how to find information. 
- You can retake the quiz as often as you need. 
- But unfortunately because this is on a Google Form, *if you need to retake the quiz, you'll have to start over* and fill in all the questions, not just the ones you missed. However, you'll be emailed a copy of your responses that shows the correct and incorrect responses, and you can use this on retakes. 

If you have a question while taking the quiz, or if you believe you have an answer that was incorrectly marked, email me at talbertr@gvsu.edu. 

## Part 6: Telling me about yourself

Commit message:

Add personal survey to startup activity

Spring2022-225/startup-mth225-sp22.md, after:

---
tags: 225-spr22
---

# MTH 225 Spring 2022 Startup Activity

:::danger
**All parts of this activity are to be completed by 11:59pm ET on Wednesday, May 11.** Earlier is better, since you will get oriented faster. 
:::

To get off to a great start in MTH 225, complete all parts of this activity. Each part is its own self-contained mini-activity that will get you familiar with some key part of the course. **You can complete these in any order you wish** although it's recommended that you do them in the order listed below. 

Some of them may take more effort than others, but **I estimate it will take about 3-4 hours total to complete all parts** on average. Each part has instructions on how to complete the tasks, and what constitutes a successful completion. Please **complete all parts no later than 11:59pm ET on Wednesday, May 11** --- we will be assuming that you're familiar with all of these tasks below from that point forward. 

**Note about record keeping and gradebooks:** You're responsible for keeping track of what you've done and what you still need to do on this activity. Once Blackboard is back online (May 9?) I will set up columns in the gradebook where you can see a record of what you've turned in. Until then, I will keep records in a private spreadsheet. **Please do not email to ask if I successfully received your work.** If there are issues with your work, I'll let you know; and I will touch base with everyone on Tuesday May 10 if there are any parts missing. 

:::info
**You can ask a question about any part of this activity to anyone, at any time.** This activity is not bound by [the syllabus](https://hackmd.io/TchC8fZORJ29EgxQb1O4lQ) rules on academic honesty, so collaboration is fully encouraged! See the end of this document for how to ask questions. 
:::

## Part 1: Scanning and uploading a PDF 

Something you'll be doing almost every day is **handwriting solutions to problems and then uploading them to Blackboard for grading**. In this part, you will: 

* Use a scanning app for your phone and tablet to convert handwritten work on paper to a legible PDF
* Upload a PDF to a Blackboard assignment area 

[Click here for a separate page that has instructions on how to do these things](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1P6ShKUzlmMEMLxJc-EpxyRT2HELK-0KriZqDdWqstdk/edit?usp=sharing). Once you have read that document, **do the following**: 

1. Handwrite something on paper or a whiteboard --- anything at all will do. Then use a scanning app of your choice to scan the work to a legible, black-and-white PDF file. Save the file to your computer. (Give it whatever file name you want.) **As mentioned in the instructions: Use a scanning app and don't just take a photo; and make sure the file is a PDF and not an image.** 
2. On your course Blackboard site, there is an Assignment area called "Scan and Upload Practice". Upload your PDF to the assignment area. 

*Note:* If you plan on doing handwritten work using a tablet instead (for example, an iPad with Notabilty) then rather than using a scanning app, use the tablet to create the handwritten PDF and then upload. You'll need to know how to export your handwritten notes from the tablet app to a PDF; this varies from one app to another. 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You successfully uploaded a PDF of your handwritten work, that is legible. 
:::

Once you've uploaded your file, I'll "grade" it with a "1" if everything is OK, and a "0" otherwise. This point does not factor into any grade in the course. I will also leave a feedback note on your file, just like you'll see on real assignments; if you don't see it or can't read it, let me know immediately. 

## Part 2: Getting oriented in WeBWorK 

:::warning
Coming prior to week 1 -- currently waiting for WeBWorK courses to refresh following Winter 2022 semester
:::

## Part 3: Navigating and writing on the online whiteboard

**[Miro](http://miro.com)** is an online whiteboard and collaboration tool that we will use extensive in class activities and in between classes. It's available as a webpage at the link above (http://miro.com). There are also [desktop apps for macOS and Windows](https://help.miro.com/hc/en-us/articles/360017572854-Desktop-app), and mobile apps for [iOS](https://apps.apple.com/us/app/miro-online-whiteboard/id1180074773) and [Android](https://play.google.com/store/apps/details?id=com.realtimeboard). 

For this Part, **do the following**: 

1. Sign up on Miro using [this link](https://miro.com/welcomeonboard/VnJzckUwVHptMkVzdWtTWThsdlNPa2JIWW4yT29ER1psMXBZaHFNdFVQOWI0emFTQXF2UjNwaHhlVVNHVm9MN3wzMDc0NDU3MzQ5MzUyMTczOTI5?share_link_id=832910622003): 
> https://miro.com/welcomeonboard/VnJzckUwVHptMkVzdWtTWThsdlNPa2JIWW4yT29ER1psMXBZaHFNdFVQOWI0emFTQXF2UjNwaHhlVVNHVm9MN3wzMDc0NDU3MzQ5MzUyMTczOTI5?share_link_id=832910622003

2. Then [click on this link](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5Vq85o=/?share_link_id=850780074478) and follow the steps to go through a quick tutorial about Miro. Direct link: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5Vq85o=/?share_link_id=850780074478
3. Then [click on this link](https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5YC1sg=/?share_link_id=990302407015) to do an activity where you'll write on the board, make a sticky note on the board, upload an image to the board, and leave a comment on something on the board. Instructions are on the board at the link. Direct link: https://miro.com/app/board/uXjVO5YC1sg=/?share_link_id=990302407015 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You've completed the four tasks found on the board (and left your name on each to let me know you did them).  
:::



## Part 4: Commenting on documents and video with Perusall

**[Perusall](https://app.perusall.com/)** is a tool for commenting on and asking questions about readings and video. It is a crucial part of your coursework as you interact with classmates and the professor in between class meetings and prepare for activities. 

You can access Perusall by [clicking this link](https://app.perusall.com/) or directly at https://app.perusall.com/. Please watch the following video which walks you through the account setup process and shows you how Perusall works. The class code you need is `TALBERT-WDT74`. 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/_PfAc0D2erk" title="YouTube video player" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Once you've watched the video, **do the following**: 

1. Set up your account on Perusall and log in. 
2. You will see an Assignment called **Startup Activity Part 4** that is due by 11:59pm ET on Wednesday, May 11. **Click to open that assignment.**
3. **Complete the assignment.** You'll see instructions once the assignment is open. It involves reading through a PDF of the course syllabus and leaving a comment or a question; then doing the same with a video from the course playlist. 

:::success
**Successful completion means:** You've set up your account and completed the assignment by leaving a comment or question on both the syllabus and the video.
:::

*Note:* Perusall will assign a score to your comments or questions using a machine learning algorithm that determines how substantive the content is. That score *does not* matter for this assignment. In fact I am not entirely sure how it works, so your work here will help me. 

## Part 5: Learning the syllabus 

After Parts 1-4, you'll have learned the basics of most of the course tools we will use. Now it's time to learn about the course itself by getting comfortable with the syllabus. 

You can access the syllabus by [clicking this link](https://hackmd.io/@rtalbert235/SksWU-sE9) or directly at https://hackmd.io/@rtalbert235/SksWU-sE9. A PDF copy will be available on Blackboard. Once you have accessed the syllabus, **do the following**: 

1. *Read through the syllabus from beginning to end*. You don't need to remember or comprehend everything, but do take note of anything that seems confusing or unusual, and go back and read those again. The main idea is to *familiarize yourself with what is in the syllabus and where things are located* so you can search things up later. **Note that you'll already have completed this if you've done Part 4 (*Commenting on documents and video with Perusall*)**. 
2. Then [click here to take a 20-question quiz](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdPgXsjSCvx_8KZ_6S5uPWe2JxzGMCppdEdzaL2EHTDImaU5Q/viewform) over the syllabus. 


:::success
**Successful completion means:** You have scored **at least 18 out of 20** points on the quiz. 
:::

Please note: 

- You can have the syllabus and other course documents out in front of you while taking the quiz. Again the purpose here is to learn how to find information. 
- You can retake the quiz as often as you need. 
- But unfortunately because this is on a Google Form, *if you need to retake the quiz, you'll have to start over* and fill in all the questions, not just the ones you missed. However, you'll be emailed a copy of your responses that shows the correct and incorrect responses, and you can use this on retakes. 

If you have a question while taking the quiz, or if you believe you have an answer that was incorrectly marked, email me at talbertr@gvsu.edu. 

## Part 6: Telling me about yourself 

Finally, I'd like to learn a little more about **you**. Please **do the following**: 

1. [Click on this link to take a brief survey](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdcdydA2Ov-U8M8MSOCmUh1PwZBVvqcL10-JdomfVWbfloQUw/viewform) about your background and goals for the class. Direct link: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdcdydA2Ov-U8M8MSOCmUh1PwZBVvqcL10-JdomfVWbfloQUw/viewform 


:::success
**Successful completion means:** You've filled out the survey and submitted it. Responses will go into a spreadsheet, so there's nothing to "turn in" --- just submit the form. 
:::


## If you have questions...

**You can ask a question about anything at any time.** 

For *public-facing questions* --- questions that don't divulge personal information and which other students might benefit from seeing --- put them [the course Padlet](https://padlet.com/talbertr1/6itl6dvga4zytpc1). Direct link: https://padlet.com/talbertr1/6itl6dvga4zytpc1 There is a login option; if you want your name on a question or comment, sign in using your GVSU account. Otherwise if you want to be anonymous, don't sign in (or, make sure you are signed out).

For *private* or *personal* questions, email is the best venue: talbertr@gvsu.edu.
