# Standards for Student Work -- MTH 225 Winter 2024

## How to use this document

**This document contains all the details of what you will be asked to do on different assessments in the course, and what constitutes "Successful" work on each task.** You should consider this document to be of equal importance as the Syllabus and calendar in terms of guiding your progress in the course. Study it carefully and refer to it each time before submitting an assignment, to ensure you're giving your best effort and to minimize the number of revisions and resubmissions you will do.


## Standards for Engagement Credit items 

You will have numerous small assignments that can earn engagement credits. These include but are not limited to:

- Class Preps (short assignments done to get ready for class meetings)
- Attendance at class meetings
- The Startup Assignment 
- Occasional practice sets done online 

The variety of these assignments is such that there is no single set of standards for acceptable work on them. Instead, **each engagement credit item will have "Success Criteria" clearly indicated on the assignment itself**. Satisfying the success criteria will earn the engagement credit(s). Most of the time, the success criteria will simply be completion of a task (for example, showing up for class). 

## Standards for Skills 

The 16 Skills listed in Appendix A of the syllabus are typically assessed through **Checkpoints**, given in class, that contain one problem for every Core Skills plus an additional problem for every Supplemental Skill that is either new or that previously appeared on a Checkpoint. Please refer to the table below for what you will typically be asked to do on these Skill problems, and what constitutes a successful attempt on each. 

Please note that **the tasks and success criteria are subject to change** (and changes will be announced beforehand through Blackboard announcements); and while the success criteria will be reprinted on each Checkpoint, some success criteria might contain additional detail to help you meet the standards. 

| Skill | Task | Success Criteria | 
| --- | --- | ---- | 
| C1 | Given a conditional statement, write out the hypothesis, conclusion, converse, contrapositive, inverse, and negation of the statement. | All six items are correct and clearly stated. | 
| C2 | Given the statement of a proposition to be proven with mathematical induction, state the complete induction proof framework. | The predicate is correctly identified and has no quantifiers. The base case is correctly stated and has a complete and correct proof. The inductive hypothesis and proof step are correctly stated in specific terms. | 
| C3 | Given several sets, state whether certain objects are elements or not; state whether two of the sets are subsets of each other or not, or equal or not. Given a set in set-builder notation, state whether the notation is syntactically correct or not; if it is, then rewrite the set in roster notation. | All items involving element, subset, and equality determinations are correct. All sets using incorrect set-builder syntax are correctly identified. Up to two simple mistakes are allowed in rewriting sets into roster notation. | 
| C4 | Given several sets in roster notation, find intersections, unions, complements, power sets, and Cartesian products and phrase the results in roster notation. Also find the cardinality of at least one of the sets. | All responses are correct up to two simple errors. | 
| C5 | Given 2-3 simple counting problems involving the Additive, Multiplicative, and Inclusion/Exclusion Principles, state which principle is used to solve the problem and then give a brief solution with all setup work shown. | The correct method is identified in each case; the setup and subsequent work is shown; and the answers are correct with up to two simple errors allowed. | 
| C6 | Compute the factorial of a positive integer and binomial coefficient using the closed formula. And given a problem that involves selection from a set with or without ordering, a pemutation, or a "dots and dividers" approach, briefly explain how you are solving the problem, then give the setup, intermediate work, and an answer. | The factorial and binomial coefficient are correct. The counting problem has the method clearly stated, the setup and intermediate work shown, and the answer is correct with up to two simple errors allowed. | 
| S1 | Given three integers in either base 2, 8, 10, or 16, convert it to one of the other bases. Conversions from base 10 are to be done using the base conversion algorithm. Also, given the binary form of a positive integer, find the binary form of its negative using two's complement notation. | All, or all but one, of the base conversions must be correct, and conversions from base 10 must involve the base conversion algorithm. The computation of the negative integer using two's complement must be correct and show all the intermediate steps. | 
| S2 | Given an addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division problem in binary, find the resulting binary answers without converting to another base. | At least three of the four answers must be correct with intermediate steps shown. | 
| S3 | Given a "molecular" proposition involving two or three "atomic" statements, construct the complete truth table with all intermediate columns shown. And given two different statements involving two atomic statements each, construct complete truth tables for each and then state whether the two statements are logically equivalent or not. | The first truth table is correct with up to two errors allowed. The truth tables in the second part are correct with up to two errors allowed, and whether the statements are logically equivalent is clearly stated and consistent with the results of the truth tables. | 
| S4 | Given two predicates involving one or two variables each, find the truth values of the predicates at several specific inputs; the truth values of one or two of the predicates with universal or existential quantifiers; and state the negation of a third predicate given in English. | All, or all but one, of the responses are correct. | 
| S5 | Given a recurrence relation that defines an integer sequence, compute the first 6-8 terms of the sequence. | The first four terms of the sequence are correctly computed with intermediate steps clearly shown; and all, or all but one, of the rest of the terms that are requested are correctly computed. | 
| S6 | Given the first three steps of a recursive pattern of images, integers, or other structures, derive a recurrence relation that will generate the entire pattern. | The initial condition or conditions are clearly stated, and the recurrence relation is clearly and correctly stated *and* has a brief explanation for how it was obtained. | 
| S7 | Given 6-8 mappings between sets presented as visual diagrams, for each one: State if the mapping is a function; if so, state its domain, codomain, and range as sets in roster notation. | All mappings are correctly identified as functions or non-functions. For the ones that are functions, all (or all but one) have the domain, codomain, and range clearly and correctly stated. | 
| S8 | Given three functions presented as visual diagrams, formulas, or verbal descriptions, for each one: State whether the function is injective but not surjective, surjective but not injective, neither injective nor surjective, or bijective. If any function *fails* to have a particular property give a specific, concrete example where the property fails. | At least two of the three functions are correctly labeled. And, all instances of failure to have a property are accompanied by a correct, specific, concrete example that shows the property fails. | 
| S9 | Given 3-4 numerical sequences presented as lists, determine whether each one is a geometric sequence, an arithmetic sequence, or neither. If a sequence is either geometric or arithmetic, stated both a closed formula for the sequence and a complete recursive definition. | All sequences are correctly labeled. Of the ones that are either geometric or arithmetic, all (or all but one) of the closed formulas and recurrence relations are correctly stated, and have consistent indexing. | 
| S10 | Given a second-order linear homogeneous recurrence relation, use the characteristic root technique to find a closed-form solution. | The characteristic equation and characteristic roots are correct. The remainder of the solution shows all intermediate steps in a clear order, and the final answer is correct up to one simple error. | 

**What is a "simple" error?** A "simple" error on a Checkpoint problem is one that *does not pertain directly to the Skill being assessed* and which *does not oversimplify the problem once it's made*. Two main kinds of simple errors are: 

- **Copying a problem down incorrectly onto your submission, as long as the copy error doesn't oversimplify the resulting problem**. For example, on Skill C6 if you are asked to compute $7!$ (7 factorial) but accidentally write down $9!$, this is a simple error because the resulting problem is about the same difficulty as the original, and as long as you follow through and correctly compute $9!$ (it's 362880) you will not be penalized. However if you miscopied it as $2!$, this significantly simplifies the problem and would not be considered "simple". Or, if you miscopid it as $9!$ and then didn't use the correct process for finding the answer, that's also not considered "simple". 
- **Making a mistake in algebra or arithmetic when arithmetic or algebra aren't the main Skill being assessed**. For example, in Skill C3 if you are given the set $\{n-1 \, : \, n \in \{-1,1,4\}\}$, you are supposed to "map" the formula $n-1$ over the given set, to get a result of $\{-2,0,3\}$. Suppose you subtract incorrectly and compute $(-1) - 1$ as $0$ instead of $-2$, so your answer is $\{-1,0,3\}$. The Skill is not about whether you can do subtraction correctly; it's about whether you know how to map a function over a set. So this would be considered a simple error. However, note that a similar error might *not* be simple in other contexts. For example, in Skill S10, if you try to solve the equation $(x+1)(x-3) = 0$ for $x$ and get $x = 1, x = 3$ --- dropping the minus sign on the "1" --- then that is *not* a simple error because finding the correct solutions is a critical step in the method that is being assessed. 

## Standards for Challege Problems

Challenge Problems are extensions and applications of the basic Skills. They are complex, challenging, multi-step problems that require a strong grasp of the basics, creativity, and persistence. They almost always involve providing clear, correct, complete explanations aimed at a particular audience. **The final answer is not as important on Challenge Problems as the explanations -- and the explanation is the primary basis for the grade.** Challenge problems are marked either "Success" or "Retry". **Success** means that the solution to the problem is *correct*, *clearly communicated*, and *complete*. **Retry** means that the standard for "Success" was not met in one or more areas.

Your standard audience for Challenge Problems is *a classmate in MTH 225 who is new to the problem*: Someone who has the mathematical and technical background that you have from their study in the course, but who has no knowledge of the problem you are solving. All solutions need to be aimed at this audience unless it says otherwise. Before you turn in a submission of a Challenge Problem, ask yourself honestly: If I were receiving this solution from a classmate, would I be able to understand the solution and agree with the results, using only what is in the solution along with the basic skills from the class? If the answer is "no", then keep working to make the solution clearer, more correct, or more complete. 

Here are some details about the three aspects of "Successful" work: 

- **Completeness** means that all required parts of the solution are fully present and explained, with no major gaps left for the reader to fill in. A complete solution is self-contained: **A reader from the standard audience above should be able to follow the solution completely from start to finish without doing any extra work.** When writing up a solution, if you can't honestly say that the average MTH 225 could follow the solution from beginning to end and agree with your conclusions without doing any additional work on the side, then your writeup needs further editing. (And it will probably be marked *Revise* if submitted.)

- **Correctness** means the work is free from major errors. There are four main kinds of major errors that can affect correctness: 

1. *Computational error*. This is when you simply make a mistake in computing something, like adding $5+3$ and getting $9$. (Sometimes these computational errors are not "major"; but always strive to find and fix them before submitting work.)
2. *Logical error*. This is when you draw incorrect conclusions from data. For example, if you are told that the statement "All math professors are over 40 years old" is false but conclude that *no* math professors are over 40, that's a logical error. (You can only conclude that *there exists* a math professor who isn't over 40.)
3. *Factual error*. This results from misstating definitions, theorems, steps of an algorithm, or parameters in a problem statement. For example, if you are using the Binomial Coefficient and get the formula wrong, that's a significant factual error (even if you use the wrong formula correctly). Or, if a problem states that there are 100 objects that need to be sorted but you mis-copy and sort 10 objects instead, that's a factual error. 
4. *Semantic error*. This happens when you make a statement that is grammatically correct, but the statement itself has no meaning. The statement "[Colorless green ideas sleep furiously](https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously)"[^1] is an example. So is the statement "The function of the graph is 2." (What does this statement even mean?) Semantic errors often happen when applying a concept to the wrong kind of object (like using the word "function" to describe a graph; there is no such thing as "the function of a graph"). 

- **Clear communication** means presenting the flow of your ideas in a way that makes it easy to understand. Clearly communicated mathematical solutions are typically neither 100% English and 0% math notation, nor 0% English and 100% math notation, but rather a blend of both English and math that maximizes the clarity of what you are trying to say. **A solution that is nothing but mathematical computation or computer code with little to no English explanation is generally not clear.** So is a solution that has *no* math or code in it. When English is used, the language is simple (not riddled with jargon), to the point, and free of grammatical and spelling errors; when math is used, it is well organized with no notational errors and with a coherent flow. Remember your audience -- classmates in MTH 225 who have the same math background as you but no familiarity with your problem. Would that person find your writing clear? 

The above criteria are the general standards that apply to all Challenge Problems. Some Challenge Problems (for example those involving writing Python code) might have additional, specialized criteria to be met; these will be clearly indicated on the problem itself. 

[^1]: https://www.wikidoc.org/index.php/Colorless_green_ideas_sleep_furiously

In addition to issues with correctness, completeness, and clarity, the following will result in an automatic mark of "Retry" and will result in your submission being returned to you with no further comment on its contents: 

- **Submitting only partial solutions**. For example if a problem has multiple parts but you only do one of them, or do all but one and leave a comment that says something like "I wasn't sure how to do this part". You are expected to turn in a complete, good-faith effort on all Challenge Problems. Get to work on them early so that you can give yourself time to work through the hard parts. 
- **Submitting work that is complete but does not represent a full good-faith effort.** For example, submitting complete solutions on all parts of a problem but one of those parts is obviously just a guess and does not represent serious engagement with the problem. 
- **Submitting work that consists of only answers with no serious explanation given**. Again, you are being evaluated on your explanations in Challenge Problems, not so much your answers.  
- **Submitting handwritten work**. You're expected to type up all Challenge Problem solutions using an appropriate tool. Google Docs and Microsoft Word have equation editors that will suffice for most cases. Some exceptions may be made for difficult-to-type items like diagrams. 
- **Work that is typewritten but poorly or confusingly formatted**. Your work needs to look good; messy or illogical formatting detracts from clarity. 
- **Work submitted as anything other than a PDF or Word (`*.docx`) document**. Your work will be submitted on Blackboard, where I will add feedback to it. PDFs and Word documents are the only kinds of documents that work with this feature on Blackboard. If you want to use an alternative file format, please check with me first.  