MTH325-Fall2022/design-notes/Course calendar draft.md, before:

# Course schedule 

- M 8/29: Introduction/startup
- W 8/31: Review of induction 
- F 9/2: Review of conditional statements + direct proof 

---

- M 9/5: No class (Labor Day) 
- W 9/7: Review contrapositive + proof by contrapositive 
- F 9/9: Review negations + proof by contradiction 

--- 

- M 9/12: Critical analysis of proofs 
- W 9/14: Time for CSS quiz 
- F 9/16: G.1 + G.2

---

- M 9/19: G.3
- W 9/21: G.4
- F 9/23: Finish G.4 + CSS quiz 2

--- 

- M 9/26: G.5
- W 9/28: G.6
- F 9/30: catchup + CSS quiz 3

---

- M 10/3: G.7
- W 10/4: G.7 + CSS quiz 3
- F 10/6: No class (Leadership in Higher Ed conference)

---

- M 10/10: G.8
- W 10/12: G.8 + review 
- F 10/14: DR.1 + CSS quiz 4

---

- M 10/17: DR.2 
- W 10/19: DR.3
- F 10/21: Review + CSS quiz 5

---

M 10/24: No class (Fall Break)
W 10/26: DR.4
F 10/28: DR.5 

---

M 10/31: DR.5
W 11/2: No class (Ed Spaces); CSS quiz 6 
F: 11/4: TBA 

---

M 11/7: DR.6 
W 11/9: CSS quiz 7
F 11/11: T.1

---

M 11/14: T.2
W 11/16: No class (ASU)
F 11/18: No class (ASU) - Quiz 8 set up 

---

M 11/21: T.3
W 11/23: No class (Thanksgiving)
F 11/25: No class (Thanksgiving) 

---

M 11/28: Quiz 9 
W 11/30: TBA
F 12/2: TBA

---

M 12/5: Quiz 10 
W 12/7: TBA
F 12/9: TBA

Commit message:

Draft of course calendar and tweaks to syllabus

MTH325-Fall2022/design-notes/Course calendar draft.md, after:

# Course schedule 

- M 8/29: Introduction/startup
- W 8/31: Review of induction 
- F 9/2: Review of conditional statements + direct proof 

---

- M 9/5: No class (Labor Day) 
- W 9/7: Review contrapositive + proof by contrapositive 
- F 9/9: Review negations + proof by contradiction 

--- 

- M 9/12: Critical analysis of proofs 
- W 9/14: Time for CSS quiz 
- F 9/16: G.1 + G.2

---

- M 9/19: G.3
- W 9/21: G.4
- F 9/23: Finish G.4 + CSS quiz 2

--- 

- M 9/26: G.5
- W 9/28: G.6
- F 9/30: catchup + CSS quiz 3

---

- M 10/3: G.7
- W 10/4: G.7 + CSS quiz 3
- F 10/6: No class (Leadership in Higher Ed conference)

---

- M 10/10: G.8
- W 10/12: G.8 + review 
- F 10/14: DR.1 + CSS quiz 4

---

- M 10/17: DR.2 
- W 10/19: DR.3
- F 10/21: Review + CSS quiz 5

---

M 10/24: No class (Fall Break)
W 10/26: DR.4
F 10/28: DR.5 

---

M 10/31: DR.5
W 11/2: No class (Ed Spaces); CSS quiz 6 
F: 11/4: TBA 

---

M 11/7: DR.6 
W 11/9: CSS quiz 7
F 11/11: T.1

---

M 11/14: T.2
W 11/16: No class (ASU)
F 11/18: No class (ASU) - Quiz 8 set up 

---

M 11/21: T.3
W 11/23: No class (Thanksgiving)
F 11/25: No class (Thanksgiving) 

---

M 11/28: Quiz 9 
W 11/30: TBA
F 12/2: Mini-quiz just on the T standards 

---

M 12/5: Quiz 10 
W 12/7: TBA (course retrospective)
F 12/9: Mini quiz on T standards
