MTH325-Fall2022/design-notes/MTH 325 Fall 2022 content skill standards.md, before:

# MTH 325 Fall 2022 Content Standards/Skills 

## Group P: Proof

- P.1: Given a statement to prove with mathematical induction, I can identify the predicate, state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the rest of the proof. 
- P.2: Given a conditional statement, I can state the assumptions and conclusions for a direct proof, proof by contrapositive, and proof by contradiction. 
- P.3: I can conduct a critical analysis of a proposed proof of a logical proposition. 

## Group G: Graphs

- G.1: I can represent a graph in different ways and change representations from one to another. 
- G.2: I can determine information about a graph and its individual vertices and edges using different representations. 
- G.3: I can give examples of graphs having combinations of various properties or explain why no such example exists, and I can draw examples of special ("named") graphs. 
- G.4: I can determine whether two graphs are isomorphic; I can give an explicit isomorphism if they are, and an explanation if they are not. 
- G.5: I can give a valid vertex coloring for a graph and determine a graph's chromatic number. 
- G.6: I can determine whether a graph has an Euler path or Euler circuit, and whether a graph has a Hamiltonian path or cycle.
- G.7: I can use Prim's Algorithm and Kruskal's Algorithm to construct a minimum spanning tree for a weighted graph. 
- G.8: I can use Dijkstra's Algorithm to find a minimum-weight path between two vertices in a connected weighted graph. 

## Group DR: Digraphs and Relations

- DR.1: I can determine information about a directed graph and its individual vertices and edges using different representations.
- DR.2: I can represent a relation in different ways and change representations from one to another.  
- DR.3: I can give examples of relations on a set that have combinations of the properties of reflexivity, symmetry, antisymmetry, and transitivity.
- DR.4: I can determine if a relation is an equivalence relation; I can determine the equivalence class of an element under an equivalence relation and determine whether two elements belong to the same equivalence class. 
- DR.5: I can find the $n$th order composition of a relation with itself. 
- DR.6: I can sketch the transitive closure of a relation as a directed graph. 
- DR.7: I can determine when a set with a relation is a partially ordered set; I can draw the Hasse diagram of a poset and identify maximal/minimal elements and/or greatest/least elements, if they exist.

## Group T: Trees 

- T.1: I can determine whether a description of a graph (list of vertex and edge sets, degree sequence, a drawing, or list of properties) represents a tree. 
- T.2: Given a list with a total ordering, I can construct the binary search tree.
- T.3: I can list the vertices of a tree in the order they are visited using preorder, inorder, and postorder traversals.

Commit message:

Nearly final version of content standards

MTH325-Fall2022/design-notes/MTH 325 Fall 2022 content skill standards.md, after:

# MTH 325 Fall 2022 Content Standards/Skills 

## Group P: Proof

- P.1: Given a statement to prove with mathematical induction, I can identify the predicate, state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the rest of the proof. 
- P.2: Given a conditional statement, I can state the assumptions and conclusions for a direct proof, proof by contrapositive, and proof by contradiction. 
- P.3: I can conduct a critical analysis of a proposed proof of a logical proposition. 

## Group G: Graphs

- G.1: I can represent a graph in different ways and change representations from one to another. 
- G.2: I can determine information about a graph and its individual vertices and edges using different representations. 
- G.3: I can give examples of graphs having combinations of various properties or explain why no such example exists, and I can draw examples of special ("named") graphs.
- G.4: I can determine whether two graphs are isomorphic; I can give an explicit isomorphism if they are, and an explanation if they are not. 
- G.5: I can give a valid vertex coloring for a graph and determine a graph's chromatic number. 
- G.6: I can determine whether a graph has an Euler path or Euler circuit, and whether a graph has a Hamiltonian path or cycle.
- G.7: I can use Prim's Algorithm and Kruskal's Algorithm to construct a minimum spanning tree for a weighted graph. 
- G.8: I can use Dijkstra's Algorithm to find a minimum-weight path between two vertices in a connected weighted graph. 

## Group DR: Digraphs and Relations

- DR.1: I can determine information about a directed graph and its individual vertices and edges using different representations.  
- DR.2: I can give examples of relations on a set that have combinations of the properties of reflexivity, symmetry, antisymmetry, and transitivity.
- DR.3: I can determine if a relation is an equivalence relation; I can determine the equivalence class of an element under an equivalence relation and determine whether two elements belong to the same equivalence class. 
- DR.4: I can find the $n$th order composition of a relation with itself. 
- DR.5: I can sketch the transitive closure of a relation as a directed graph. 
- DR.6: I can determine when a set with a relation is a partially ordered set; I can draw the Hasse diagram of a poset and identify maximal/minimal elements and/or greatest/least elements, if they exist.

## Group T: Trees 

- T.1: I can determine whether a description of a graph (list of vertex and edge sets, degree sequence, a drawing, or list of properties) represents a tree. 
- T.2: Given a list with a total ordering, I can construct the binary search tree.
- T.3: I can list the vertices of a tree in the order they are visited using preorder, inorder, and postorder traversals.

---

## What we do with these 

Two demonstrations of skill to meet a standard. 

| Grade | Content standards met* | 
| ----  | --------------------- | 
|  A    | 18 | 
|  B    | 15 |
|  C    | 12 | 
|  D    | 8 | 


*Required content standards: P.1, P.2, G.1, G.2, and DR.1. 

- Completing the Proof badge: 
  - Meet all three "P" content standards 
  - Submit three proofs: One must use some form of induction, the other two must use different techniques and *not* use induction. 
  - A reflection essay 

- Completing the Applications badge: 
  - Choose three from: G.5, G.7, G.8, DR.5, DR.6, T.2, T.3 
  - Complete three different Application Problems 
  - Reflection essay
