# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 6A: Functions

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Sunday, October 11

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

Module 6 is all about **functions** which is a somewhat familiar idea for us. We're pretty familiar with the concept of functions through previous math work and through using Python functions -- a function is just a way of taking objects in one set (the *domain* of the function) and changing them into objects in another set. The purpose of this module is to make this basic idea mathematically precise. You'll learn about the *domain*, *range*, and *codomain* of a function, different ways of representing functions (especially when they involve different data types), the special functions `floor` and `ceiling`, and what it means to *compose* two functions.

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SF.3**  **(Core)**: I can determine whether or not a given relation is a function, determine the domain and codomain of a function, and find the image and preimage of a point using a function.
-   **SF.4**: I can determine whether a function is injective, surjective, or bijective.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

+ State the definition of a function. 
+ Determine whether a relationship is a function, when stated as a diagram, formula, table of outputs, or visual image. 
+ Define and use the *floor* and *ceiling* functions.
+ Find the image of an input using a function using correct function notation. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

+ State the domain, codomain, and range of a function.
+ Find the composition of two functions. 


## Resources for Learning

**For this module, I recommend you watch the videos first and THEN read in the text.**


**Video:** These were made by me for MTH 210 (Communicating in Mathematics) but they work for MTH 225 as well. 

+ Functions: The big concepts (6:12) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=PZFU3JC3Plo&list=PL2419488168AE7001&index=77
+ Functions: Terminology (15:44) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=3rpl_HGcUIs&list=PL2419488168AE7001&index=78
+ Function example: Names to initials (7:57) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Aii47Dz7YF4&list=PL2419488168AE7001&index=79
+ Function example: Counting primes (8:29) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=fSdFpxzjrlw&list=PL2419488168AE7001&index=80
+ Function example: 


**Text:** Read the following from *Discrete Mathematics: An Open Introduction*: 

- In [Section 0.4](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_intro-functions.html), 






You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.



## Exercises

The exercises are on Classkick as "Module 5B Daily Prep". 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTY0MTc3MTExM119
-->