# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 8B: Combinatorial proof

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, Thursday, October 29

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In the last few lessons, we've focused in on not just *computing* things but *explaining why things are true*. For example, we used logical reasoning to think about why the number of $n$-bit strings with weight $k$ is the same as the number of $k$-element subsets of an $n$-element set. In this module, we will look at the concept of *mathematical proof* --- what it is, and why computer scientists need it --- and look at the concept of *combinatorial proof* where we prove mathematical statements by counting things. 



## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **P.1:** I can analyze and write a combinatorial proof of a combinatorial identity.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 




**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Do a critical analysis of a combinatorial proof and fill in missing steps and justifications for a written proof. 

## Resources for Learning

**Video:** **First**, watch these: 

- What is a factorial (1:43) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=EyQXHRHtTFk 
- Permutation formula (7:34) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=DROZVHObeko  (Not a great title to this one. It's really about counting $k$-permutations and finding $P(n,k)$.) 


**Text:** Once you've watched those videos, then go and [read Section 1.3](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_counting-combperm.html) from the Levin text, especially the "Closed formula for ${n}\choose{k}$ and the discussion just before it --- that's not covered in the videos. 


You are free to search for and use other resources in addition to, or instead of the above, as long as you can work the exercises below.



## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://bit.ly/37kVoip

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTk5MzQ1Mjc1NCwtMTU2NjIxMjA0MF19
-->