# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 10A: Integer sequences 

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Tuesday, November 10** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

Module 10 is all about **sequences of integers**, which play a surprisingly important role in computer science, as they tend to describe the number of ways to count certain sequences of outcomes. In Module 10A we will look at some overall basic tools for working with integer sequences, most importantly how to express them as **closed formulas** and with **recursive definitions**. Module 10A will be our first close look at *recursion*, which we first encountered with the binomial coefficient. We'll meet some important sequences such as the **triangular numbers** and the **Fibonacci numbers** and how to work with the mathematical symbols $\sum$ and $\prod$ for adding up and multiplying, respectively, the terms of a sequence. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SR.1**  **(Core)**: I can generate several values in a sequence defined using a closed-form expression or using recursion.
-   **SR.2**: I can use sigma notation to rewrite a sum and determine the sum of an expression given in sigma notation.


**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Explain the difference between a closed formula for a sequence and a recursive definition for a sequence. 
- Given a closed formula for a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- Given a recursive definition for a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- State the first 5-10 terms of the *triangular numbers* and the *Fibonacci numbers*. 
- Given a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of its sequence of partial sums. 


**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Given a counting problem, identify whether stars-and-bars applies, and if so, solve the problem. 

## Resources for Learning

**Reading:** The introduction to [this section (1.5) in the Levin textbook](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_stars-and-bars.html) is very good this time, so read it carefully and follow along with the example it gives. Then study the other examples and try some of the interactive exercises at the end. 

**Video:** There are numerous videos for the stars and bars method, but I recommend this one in particular: 

- Stars and bars (and bagels) (16:11) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=UTCScjoPymA   

It's long, but very well done and engaging. When you watch it, note that **the actual application of stars and bars doesn't appear until the 6:00 mark** --- the first part of the video is setting up a way to solve the problem that *doesn't* work particularly well, so that you'll appreciate the simplicity of the stars-and-bars method. If you find yourself getting a little lost in the first 6 minutes, that's actually intentional. 


## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://bit.ly/37N0NPw 

## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbNzc0NTYzMzMxXX0=
-->