# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 10AB: Arithmetic and geometric sequences 

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Thursday, November 12** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In Module 10B, we're going to focus on two specific kinds of integer sequences: **arithmetic** sequences in which each pair of consecutive terms is the same distance apart (like $1, 4, 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SR.1**  **(Core)**: I can generate several values in a sequence defined using a closed-form expression or using recursion.
-   **SR.2**: I can use sigma notation to rewrite a sum and determine the sum of an expression given in sigma notation.


**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Explain the difference between a *closed formula* for a sequence and a *recursive definition* for a sequence. 
- Given a closed formula for a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- Given a recursive definition for a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- State the first 5-10 terms of the *triangular numbers* and the *Fibonacci numbers*. 



**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Given a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of its sequence of partial sums. 
- Find a closed formula for a sequence using known closed formulas for related sequences. 
- Given a sequence of numbers or visual patterns, write a recursive definition that generates the sequence. 
- Write a sum or product using $\sum$ and $\prod$ notation; and calculate sums and products given using these notations. 

## Resources for Learning

**Reading:** [Read through Section 2.1 of the Levin textbook](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_seq_intro.html). Be sure to **read actively**: Take notes, ask questions, work through the examples, work through some of the exercises. 

**Video:** No required videos this time. Although, if you want to learn some fun stuff about the Fibonacci numbers, check out this 7-minute TED talk: 

<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/SjSHVDfXHQ4" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; clipboard-write; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

Direct link: https://youtu.be/SjSHVDfXHQ4


## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdg0tZ2zAzV7hybui2JFc7GibImPrBYNG2bzKZ_vYSYRaic6g/viewform


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTM0NzkwMTE3Nl19
-->