# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 10B: Arithmetic and geometric sequences  

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Thursday, November 12** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

In Module 10B we're going to focus on two common kinds of integer sequences: **arithmetic** sequences in which each pair of consecutive terms is the 

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

-  sequence and e he

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SR.1**  **(Core)**: I can generate several values in a sequence defined using a closed-form expression or using recursion.
-   **SR.2**: I can use sigma notation to rewrite a sum and determine the sum of an expression given in sigma notation.
same distance apart (like $1, 4, 7, 10, \dots$), and **geometric** sequences in which each pair of consecutive terms has a common ratio (like $1, 4, 16, 64, 256, \dots$). These sequences are common in everyday applications and it's particularly easy to find closed formulas as well as recursive definitions for them, so they're a good place to start a deeper study of how to find generating expressions for sequences in general. 

## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   **SR.3**  **(Core)**: I can find closed-form and recursive expressions for arithmetic and geometric sequences and find their sums.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- Explain the difference between a *closed formula* for aState the definition of an *arithmetic* sequence, and a *recursive definition* for a sequence. 
- Given a closed formula for a sequence, generatfind the common difference of an arithmetic sequence. 
- Determine twhe first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- Given a recursive definition for a sequence, generate the first 5-10 terms of the sequence. 
- State the first 5-10 terms of the *triangular numbers* and the *Fibonacci numbers*ther a given sequence is arithmetic. 
- State the definition of an *geometric* sequence, and find the common ratio of an arithmetic sequence. 
- Determine whether a given sequence is geometric. 



**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Find closed formulas and recursive definitions for an arithmetic sequence. 
- Find closed formulas and recursive definitions for a geometric sequence. 
- Find the sum of terms in an arithmetic sequence. 
- Find the sum of terms in a geometric sequence. 


## Resources for Learning

**Reading:** [Read through Section 2.2 of the Levin textbook](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_seq-arithgeom.html). Be sure to **read actively**: Take notes, ask questions, work through the examples, work through some of the exercises. 

**Video:** 

- Arithmetic sequences: A formula for the "n-th" term (11:05) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=lj_X9JVSF8k 


## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdg0tZ2zAzV7hybui2JFc7GibImPrBYNG2bzKZ_vYSYRaic6g/viewform


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMTgzODIzMzAwMCwtMjEwNjYzNDQ5NSw2MD
I3NTkxODldfQ==
-->