Guided Practice for MTH 325: Section 10.2
=========================================

## Overview 

The applicability of tree structures in computer science cannot be overstated. It seems like almost all important problems in CS have some sort of solution based on trees! In this next lesson we will explore a few of these applications, specifically the use of trees to do efficient search procedures and the use of trees to encode textual information in a way that build in data compression without data loss. 

## Learning Objectives in this section

+ M.28 (CORE): Construct a binary search tree for an ordered set of objects and then use Algorithm 1 to find and add items into the binary search tree. 
+ M.29: Use Huffman coding to encode a list of symbols with associated frequencies. 

## Resources for learning

In your textbook, do the following: 

+ __FOCUS__ on the following parts of the textbook in Section 10.2: 
    - Pages 695 through 698 (Binary Search Trees), especially the intro text and Examples 1 and 2, but _not_ including Algorithm 1.
    - Pages 700 through 703 (Prefix Codes), particularly 700-702 where the concept of prefix codes is introduced. 
+ __LIGHTLY READ__ Algorithm 1 ("read" = work out what the Algorithm does, by hand) and Algorithm 2. 
+ __SKIM__ the rest of the section to see other interesting applications of trees. 

## Activities 

1. Consider the binary search tree that's constructed in Figure 1 in the section. The final tree is in the lower-right panel of that figure. Suppose you were going to insert the word "kinesiology" into this tree. Where would it go? State your answer in terms of what the _parent_ of this word would be in the final tree. At the submission form there is a multiple choice question to select the parent of the word "kinesiology" once properly inserted into the binary search tree. (Remember that in a rooted tree, each node has exactly one parent and no more than one.) 
2. Suppose we were going to search for an item that's been put into a binary search tree -- for example, looking up one of the words in the binary search tree in Figure 1. Compare such a search to doing a linear search through a shuffled-up list of the words. Will a search through the tree always be faster? 
3. Consider the binary tree in Figure 5 that represents a prefix coding system. State the bit string that encodes the word `tan`. 
4. Generally speaking, what is the purpose of prefix codes? What's a situation where such a code might be useful in a real application? 

Submit your responses here: [http://bit.ly/1AYPb0f](http://bit.ly/1AYPb0f)
