Guided Practice for MTH 325: Section 8.1
========================================

## Overview 

We begin our mathematical work in the course with the study of _relations_. Relations are a kind of abstract model for working with relationships between sets and within a set, like a database or a social network. We will learn the definition of a relation, how to represent relations as tables and _directed graphs_, and study relations that have the properties of being _reflexive_, _symmetric_, _antisymmetric_ or _transitive_. Finally we learn how to form the _composite_ of two relations. 

## Learning Objectives in this section

+ CC.1: State the definitions of the following terms: binary relation from A to B; relation on a set A; reflexive relation; symmetric relation; antisymmetric relation; transitive relation; composite of two relations. 
+ M.1 (CORE): Determine whether a given relation is reflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric, or transitive. 
+ M.2 (CORE): Given a relation from A to B and a relation from B to C, determine the ordered pairs in the composite of the two relations.

## Resources for learning

To prepare for the activities and for class, please read __all of Section 8.1 in the Rosen (sixth edition) textbook__. 

The following videos provide additional direct instruction on this material: 

+ [Discrete Math: Intro to Relations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=h34hZ_hynzE) (Running time = 11:04) 

## Activities 

The following activities are designed to help you "get your hands dirty" with the material from the section. You are not expected to get correct results on all of these. You _are_ expected to give a good-faith effort to each item, and you are expected to come to class with specific questions about what you've been working on so that we can discuss them as a group. 

Work each of these items out in your notes. Put the final answers for each in the Google Form that is linked at the bottom of this page. 

1. Let A = {1, 2, 4, 8} and B = {5, 10, 15}. List all 12 elements of the Cartesian product A x B. (These need to be _pairs_ of numbers.)
2. Define the set C to be: {(1, 5), (1, 10), (1, 15), (2, 5), (2, 15), (4, 5), (4, 15), (8, 5), (8, 15)}. Explain why this is by definition a relation from A into B. 
3. In the relation C above, the number 1 is "related to" the number 10. (Think about why that is.) List all the elements in B to which the number 8 is related. 
4. Consider the set, G, whose elements are the names of cities and towns in the state of Michigan. Define a relation "R" on the set G by declaring city x and city y to be related (notationally, we would write this as "xRy") if x and y are in the same county. For example, the pair (Allendale, Hudsonville) is in R, but (Allendale, Grand Rapids) is not in R. On the Google form for your submissions, there is an item that asks you to check the boxes corresponding to the properties you think this relation has. The properties are: reflexive, symmetric, antisymmetric, and transitive. Think about each of these properties and decide whether the relation R has that property, and write a quick explanation in your notes. Then check the appropriate boxes on the form. 

To submit your work on the above activities, go to the Google form found at this link: [http://bit.ly/1rKp1Ak](http://bit.ly/1rKp1Ak)

Remember that you will receive a "Pass" mark for this Guided Practice if (and only if) every one of the above items has a response to it that represents a good-faith effort to be right. Actual correctness is not figured into the marking; you can make mistakes as long as you are trying to be right. On the other hand, responses that do not indicate sufficient effort (e.g. "I don't know", "I need help", etc.) will earn a __No Pass__ mark. 

Finally: What specific mathematical questions do you have about the material in section 8.1? Think of these, and then go to the Google Doc at the following link and either add a new question, or add to or upvote an existing question: 

[https://docs.google.com/document/d/11sdQGL7T50q4hwbtaqZLY33oEBrWOdKM_ZUgRBeGzvA/edit?usp=sharing](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11sdQGL7T50q4hwbtaqZLY33oEBrWOdKM_ZUgRBeGzvA/edit?usp=sharing)


