Guided Practice for MTH 325: Section 8.5
========================================

## Overview 

In this section we will introduce the concept of the _equivalence relation_, which is a special kind of relation used in many ways and applications. An equivalence relation models common relations among real-world objects, such as the "equality" relation, or the "less than or equal to" relation on real numbers, of "subset of" relation on sets. After defining what an equivalence relation is, we will look at examples and nonexamples, and then discuss the related notion of _equivalence classes_ and see how equivalence classes can be used to partition sets. 

## Learning Objectives in this section

+ CC.6: State the definitions of the following terms: Equivalence relation; equivalence class; partition of a set. 
+ CC.7: Given an equivalence relation on a set A, determine if two elements of A belong to the same equivalence class. 
+ M.8 (CORE): Determine whether a relation on a set is an equivalence relation. 
+ M.9 (CORE): Given an equivalence relation on a set A and a point x in A, determine the equivalence class of x. 
+ M.10: Given an equivalence relation on a set, determine a partition of the set using the equivalence relation. Conversely, given a partition of a set, use it to define an equivalence relation on that set. 

## Resources for learning

For basic preparation, please read __all of Section 8.5__ in the Rosen textbook. 

Here are some other resources that can supplement your basic reading: 

+ [This video about equivalence relations](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=JFXgXYCzXB4) (running time 14:02) is one that I (Talbert) made for MTH 210, "Communicating in Mathematics" which is a course for math majors. As such, some of the notation and textbook references may not be familiar, but you should be able to get something out of it anyway. 

## Activities 

As always, work out the activities below in your notes for future reference and questions. Then go to the submission form at: 

[http://bit.ly/1ClnvHz](http://bit.ly/1ClnvHz)

and put your answers in the indicated areas. There is a link to a Google Form at which you can leave and upvote any questions you have on what you've read and worked with; your answers will help set the agenda for the class meeting. 

1. Let $A$ be the set of all people in the world. At the submission form, you will find five relations on this set. Check all the ones you believe are equivalence relations. 
2. Go back to that list of relations on the set of all people and look at the ones that _weren't_ equivalence relations. For each one, list the property or properties of an equivalence relation that _fail_ to hold. 
3. Consider the set of all URLs (or web addresses). Define a relation $R$ on this set by declaring $(x,y) \in R$ if and only if the website that comes up when you enter in $x$ in a web browser is the same as the website that comes up when you enter in $y$ in a web browser. It can be shown (not now; but you should think about it) that this is an equivalence relation. What do you think is the practical significance of the equivalence class of a URL in this relation? (A 2--3 sentence response that answers the question is sufficient. You might begin by thinking of a website that can be accessed by more than one URL -- for example [http://learningcatalytics.com](http://learningcatalytics.com) and [http://lcatalytics.com](http://lcatalytics.com).)

