Guided Practice for MTH 325: Section 9.1
========================================

## Overview 

In this section we introduce one of the most important constructions in all of mathematics and computing: the _graph_. We've already worked with one kind of graph, namely a directed graph. The undirected version of this idea has more applications and uses than we can count. In this lesson, the main goal is to introduce terminology and language used when working with graphs and to get a glimpse of some basic applications of graphs. 

## Learning Objectives in this section

+ CC.11: State the definitions of the following terms: Graph; nodes; edges; simple graph; multigraph; pseudograph; undirected and directed graph. 
+ M.13 (CORE): Use a graph to model a system of interconnected nodes.

Note that Table 1 in the section is really helpful in sorting out some of the terminology about different flavors of graphs. 

## Resources for learning

For basic preparation, please read __all of Section 9.1__ in the Rosen textbook. 

Here are some other resources that can supplement your basic reading: 

+ [This video](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=gXgEDyodOJU) (16:42) is a little on the long side, but I highly recommend it. It's very clear, written from the standpoint of computer science rather than pure math, and includes both a review of directed graphs and a bunch of applications of both directed and undirected graphs. The material on weighted graphs that starts around the 13-minute mark is not necessary for now, but we will be studying weighted graphs later, so it's worth the three minutes to check it out. 

## Activities 

As always, work out the activities below in your notes for future reference and questions. Then go to the submission form at: 

[http://bit.ly/1CQIRgn](http://bit.ly/1CQIRgn)

and put your answers in the indicated areas. There is a link to a Google Form at which you can leave and upvote any questions you have on what you've read and worked with; your answers will help set the agenda for the class meeting. 

1. Open or create a Sage worksheet, and enter in the following:

    g = graphs.RandomGNM(6,12)

    g.show()

What just happened? (Enter `graphs.RandomGNM?`, with the question mark, in another cell to get a description of the `RandomGNM` method.) Try re-executing this code a few more times to get different graphs.

2. Now in your Sage worksheet, enter in: 

    g.edges()

How does Sage represent edges in a graph? 

3. In your Sage worksheet, enter in: 

    g.edges(labels = False) 

What happens in the result? What do you think the "None" was referring to, in the output of the previous exercise? 

4. Find one more way to use Sage to generate a random graph. Enter in some Sage code that, when executed, will generate a random graph using the other way that you found. (Make sure you test it out before submitting.) 

