# MTH 225: Discrete Structures for Computer Science 1 

## Daily Preparation, Module 12A: Introduction to the concept of mathematical induction 

**Due by:** 11:59pm ET, **Sunday, November 29** 

**Estimated time requirement:** About 45-60 minutes for the whole assignment. *If you have worked on this assignment for 30 minutes and you're not at least halfway done, DON'T work any further* --- instead, *stop and ask for help* on the `#dailyprep` channel on CampusWire. Remember these are graded just on completeness and effort --- try to be right and understand everything, but don't get bogged down if you get stuck. Just give a good effort and move on, and ask a question. 



## Overview 

Our final module of the course looks both backwards and forwards. We're going look *backwards* at concepts from our study of logic (specifically predicates and quantifiers), sets, and various recursively-defined objects from other Modules to take a very close look how we can draw conclusions about those objects. This sets us up for a closer look at the idea of *mathematical proof* introduced in Module 8, with a specific kind of proof called **mathematical induction**. It's a form of proof that is well suited for making conclusions about recursively-defined objects like sequences, sums, and other things. And expanding on the idea of induction is one of the first things you will do in MTH 325 (Discrete Structures 2). 



## What you will learn 

**Learning Targets addressed in this module:** 

-   P.2  **(Core)**: Given a statement to be proven by (weak) induction, I can state and prove the base case, state the inductive hypothesis, and outline the proof.

**BEFORE** your class meeting, use the Resources for Learning (below) to learn how to do the following: 

- (*Review*) Determine which values of a variable make a predicate true. 
- Gather evidence and make a conjecture about a recursively-defined object's behavior. 

**DURING AND AFTER** your class meeting, you will learn how to do the following: 

- Explain the context in which a p


## Resources for Learning

**Video:** First, here is a refresher on the quadratic formula if you need it (be honest -- you might need it): 

- How to solve quadratic equations using the quadratic formula (5:56) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=IlNAJl36-10

Next, here are three videos covering the material for this module. These were made (by me) back in 2016 when we covered this material in MTH 325 instead of MTH 225. 

- Linear homogeneous recurrence relations (2:08) https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4c6Bg2GJvQw
- The characteristic equation and characteristic roots of recurrence relations (3:48) https://youtu.be/GvOBBcnIjlw
- Solving linear homogeneous recurrence relations (5:45) https://youtu.be/Rwm-NW9Y5iM


**Reading:** Read through [Section 2.4 of the Levin text](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/dmoi3/sec_recurrence.html), *starting at* "The Characteristic Root Technique" and continuing to the end.  The interactive exercises at the end will give you some practice too.


## Exercises

The exercises are on the following Google Form: [https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfDBhhK6ovFnH-qEsRRqVdhnRYyUAyRrGvCETwsLLukEyfOXw/viewform](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSfDBhhK6ovFnH-qEsRRqVdhnRYyUAyRrGvCETwsLLukEyfOXw/viewform)


## Submission, grading, and getting help 

**Submitting your work:** Your work is to be done on Classkick using the link/code above. Classkick saves your work as you go, so there's nothing to submit -- just do the work and you're good. 

**How this is graded:** Daily Prep assignments are graded on the basis of *completeness and effort*: If your submission has **all parts completed** (no blank entries, even if left blank accidentally) and **a good-faith effort to provide a correct solution or explanation is given** (no responses of "I don't know" or "I didn't understand") and **the work is submitted on time**, it gets a "check". Otherwise it gets an "x". If you are stuck on an item, you're expected to ask questions and give your best effort.  

**Getting help on this assignment:** *You may work with others on this assignment, but you may not copy each others' answers.* Evidence of copying will be treated as academic dishonesty. You may also ask questions on the #dailyprep channel on CampusWire, but you may not ask simply to be given the answers; giving and receiving answers on CampusWire will be treated as academic dishonesty.
<!--stackedit_data:
eyJoaXN0b3J5IjpbMjEyNzk4MDExLC0xMzI0MTcxNTA4XX0=
-->